CUDA Programming for
NVIDIA H100s
Prateek Shukla

The Prerequisites
Understanding of C/C++ syntax
Functional understanding of older architectures and the synchronous CUDA
execution model. If you cannot write a standard kernel, its difficult to understand
the asynchronous model.
Linear algebra, specifically matrix multiplication operations and basic memory
layouts. Tiled matmul understanding is a must.
A basic understanding of transformers and MLPs would help a lot, though not a
compulsory requirement. Knowing why we are optimizing these specific matrix
operations accelerates your understanding of the bottlenecks

What are the things you should have in each lesson
There are 2 main things you need to have open for most of the time in the course
1. A notebook and a pen to create mental models
2. An AI assistant
Mental models are your interpretation of how different components work, they
are compressed ways of seeing reality. When you see a messy situation, you can
predict what matters without memorizing everything.
AI assistant is there to refine that mental model, every single time if your mental
model does not match the reality or there is doubt, then you MUST go to the AI
model and validate your mental model.

Prateek’s recommendations for completing this course
- Most of the problems arrive either from bad fundamentals/mental model so
whenever you are struck somewhere, throw all your questions on an AI model
- Stop trying to understand everything at once. That’s the trap. Your job is not to
master Hopper, CUTLASS, fast.cu, and ThunderKittens in parallel. Your job is to
build a staircase.
- In the first lessons, you are not supposed to “fully understand” everything. You
are supposed to get the map. Then later lessons add mechanism. Then code
gives the concrete reality. If you think lesson 1 must already feel complete,
you’ll panic the moment lesson 8 gets gnarly.
- Use AI agents to learn about codebases, they are the closest you can get to
accurate information for code and other primitives.

Table of contents
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

Introduction to H100s
Clusters, Data types, inline PTX, pointers
Asynchronicity and barriers
cuTensorMap
cp.async.bulk
WGMMA-1
WGMMA-2
Kernel Design
Multi GPU Part 1
Multi GPU Part 2

Introduction to H100s
A technical introduction to the NVIDIA H100 GPU, focusing on its internal
architecture, hardware components, and the significant shift toward
asynchronous execution.
Core Architecture and Specifications
Key Technical Innovations
Memory and Execution Hierarchy
Operational Logic

Clusters, Data types, inline PTX, pointers
Diving into programming and memory models. It covers four primary areas:
thread block clusters, inline PTX, memory state spaces, and hardware
synchronization.
Thread Block Clusters
Parallel Thread Execution (PTX) and Inline PTX
State Spaces and Data Types

Asynchronicity and Barriers
This lesson focuses on Asynchronicity and Hardware Barriers, detailing how the
NVIDIA H100 manages the massive speed gap between its fast computation
units and relatively slow memory access.
The Philosophy of Asynchronicity
Preventing Memory Hazards
mbarriers: Data-Driven Synchronization
Advanced Synchronization Patterns

cuTensorMap
This fourth lesson provides a deep dive into the Tensor Memory Accelerator (TMA)
and cuTensorMap, which are the hardware and software components that enable
the H100's signature asynchronous data movement.
What is the TMA?
The cuTensorMap Descriptor
Key Optimization Features in cuTensorMap(swizzle, L2 promotion, interleaving etc.)

cp.async.bulk
This lesson is on the ptx instruction cp.async.bulk which utilizes the TMA and
cuTensorMap to do bulk asynchronous copies. We talk about the innovation in
async data movement, core copy instructions and different variations.
The Core Concept: cp.async.bulk and TMA
Hopper (TMA) vs. Ampere (LSU)
Data Layouts: Unstructured vs. Structured
Synchronization and Completion Mechanisms
L2 Cache Hinting, Multicasting
Prefetching and Async Reductions

WGMMA-1
This lesson focuses on executing the actual math using Warp Group Matrix
Multiply Accumulate (WGMMA) operations on Hopper GPU
The Paradigm Shift: Warps to Warpgroups
The Core Instruction: wgmma.mma_async
Fetching Matrix A: Registers vs. Shared Memory
Managing Registers with ldmatrix
The WGMMA Descriptor

WGMMA Part 2
This lesson wraps up Hopper's math pipeline by covering synchronization, storing
results, and the nuances of low-precision and sparse operations.
Pipelining with WGMMA Groups
Storing the Output: stmatrix
The FP8 Paradigm Shift
FP8 Quirks: Packing and K-Major Layouts
Sparse WGMMA

Kernel Design
Lesson on high-performance Kernel Design, specifically focusing on optimizing
compute-bound kernels. The core philosophy revolves around Warp
Specialization, Pipelining, and Persistent Scheduling to ensure that the GPU's
Tensor Cores are utilized near 100% efficiency.
Classification and the "Ridge Point" for compute bound kernels
Warp Specialization
Circular Buffering and Pipelining
Intelligent Scheduling
The Epilogue and Multi-Kernel Optimization

Code
-

sm90_pipeline.hpp (cutlass)
sm90_gemm_tma_warpspecialized_pingpong.hpp (cutlass)
sm90_gemm_tma_warpspecialized_cooperative.hpp (cutlass)
sm90_mma_tma_gmma_ss_warpspecialized.hpp (cutlass)
sm90_mma_tma_gmma_rs_warpspecialized.hpp (cutlass)
sm90_tile_scheduler.hpp (cutlass)
sm90_tile_scheduler_group.hpp (cutlass)
sm90_tile_scheduler_stream_k.hpp (cutlass)
sm90_tma_epilogue_warpspecialized (cutlass)
sm90_builder.inl (cutlass)
fast.cu(matmul_12.cuh)

Multi GPU Part 1
This lesson deals with specific technologies used to fuse multiple GPUs into a
single, massive execution engine.
The Compute Bottleneck of a single GPU
The Internal Node Mesh (NVLink & NVSwitch)
The Scaling Fabric (Inter-Node)
CUDA P2P and MPI

Multi GPU Part 2
This lesson deals with the orchestration and communication software required to
make raw hardware act as a single execution engine. We map how task managers
allocate resources and introduce isolated processes to each other. Then we learn
about specific primitives and mathematics used to move tensor data across the
cluster during training.
Cluster Orchestration (Slurm + PMIx)
Network Initialization (NCCL Setup)
The Four Parallelism Paradigms
The Communication Primitives



--- END OF 0. CUDA Programming for NVIDIA H100 GPUs.pdf ---


Multi GPU
Part 2
Prateek Shukla

Slurm
SLURM is an open-source workload manager and job scheduler designed for
Linux-based high-performance computing clusters.
It allocates the GPUs, CPUs, and memory. It knows where your job is running but
doesn't necessarily know how your application talks to itself across those nodes.
In the old days, mpirun would use SSH to connect to every node, check hostnames,
and exchange keys. On large clusters (e.g., 64+ nodes), this "handshake" could take
minutes
With srun --mpi=pmix, Slurm launches the processes on all nodes simultaneously.

PMIx (Process Management Interface for Exascale)
When Slurm launches your 1,000 processes. Now rank 5 (Process #5) knows it is
alive, but it doesn't know the IP address of Rank 0, or how to talk to Rank 999. They
are isolated islands.
Before heavy training begins, the processes need to exchange technical details (IP
addresses, GPU handles). PMIx provides a temporary database.
PMIx_Put: A process pushes its metadata (e.g., host IP, port, CUDA IPC handle) to

the local PMIx server.
PMIx_Commit: Pushes local data to the global namespace.
PMIx_Get: Other processes query this data to discover their peers.

Why SLURM and PMIx are important together
Slurm alone handles resource allocation (nodes, GPUs, CPUs) and task
placement, but it historically relied on older PMI versions that don’t scale well
beyond ~10k GPUs.
PMIx is the modern, exascale-ready process management interface (replacing
PMI-1/PMI-2).
Slurm + PMIx integration allows:
Direct launch of processes without mpirun in many cases.
Efficient job info exchange (rank, node list, endpoints) at scale.
Tight integration with NCCL via direct NCCL-PMIx plugins.

SLURM scripts
It is a simple text file (usually ending in .sh or .sbatch) that tells Slurm two things:
What resources you need (Time, GPUs, CPUs, Memory).
What you want to do once you get those resources (Run Python, compile code,
etc.).
Once we write the script we need to launch using sbatch script.sh
Once the script is launched, Slurm logs into the compute node, sets up the
environment, and runs the commands listed in the script.

Terminology
Job: The Job is the highest-level unit of work in Slurm. It represents the resource
allocation. When you run sbatch or salloc, you are creating a Job.
Task: A Task is a single process of the running application. It is the number of
processes which run per node/gpu.
Rank: rank is simply the ID of a task, unless specified it refers to the global rank
which is the rank in the whole job.
Local rank: This is the unique ID of a task within a specific node. Ranges from 0 Number of tasks run on a single node
Namespace: for every rank inside a job this is the jobID. Unique for every rank in the
job

Device isolation
If you set slurm to use a single GPU per task then slurm doesn't just politely ask your
program to use one GPU; it forces it at the operating system level using two
mechanisms:
CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES: Slurm sets this environment variable inside the process.
This prevents CUDA to see any other devices than the ones listed here. Works for a
single node
Slurm uses the Linux Control Groups (cgroups) feature, specifically the device
allowlist where it creates a "sandbox" for Task 0.
This means that if you debug and every GPU have different task then when you look
at logs every single error would point to GPU 0 even if its not actually GPU 0

A sample script

How SLURM scripts launch PMIx for kernels
When you run srun --mpi=pmix ./my_cuda_kernel_app, Slurm doesn't just fork
processes blindly. It uses PMIx to orchestrate the startup.
After this we have to initialize PMIx using these steps:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Step 1: Connecting to slurm daemon
Step 2: Initialize PMIx, get namespace and global rank
Step 3: Get local rank,
Step 4: Use the Local Rank to select the specific GPU/GPUs
Step 5: finish the process

Initializing PMIx and connecting process to slurm

Getting identity (global rank and local rank)

Slurm typically restricts GPU visibility per task by setting CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES,
so your process sees a filtered, re-indexed set of GPUs starting at device 0.
PMIx provides the node-local rank (PMIX_LOCAL_RANK), which is the natural index to
use when distributing tasks across the GPUs assigned to that node.
Use cudaGetDeviceCount to learn how many devices are visible after filtering,
and optionally parse CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES if you need original physical indices.
For deeper debugging, query PCI bus IDs (cudaDeviceGetPCIBusId) so you can
correlate “visible device 0” with the actual hardware GPU Slurm allocated.

Binding to local GPU

After this launch the kernels and once its done, use PMIx_Finalize(NULL, 0); in
the host function to tell SLURM we are done

So what is NCCL
NVIDIA Collective Communications Library. It’s a GPU-focused library that makes
it fast (and relatively painless) to do collective communication between GPUs
In distributed training, GPUs constantly need to exchange tensors
(gradients/parameters). NCCL provides highly optimized primitives for that, such
as Allreduce, Allgather, ReduceScatter etc.
It integrates at the CUDA stream + pointer level: you hand NCCL device pointers
and a cudaStream_t, and NCCL schedules its own GPU work (kernels +
memcopies + network ops) on that stream, so it composes with your kernels via
normal CUDA stream ordering.
When you do an allReduce operation the CPU just launches a NCCL Kernel onto
the GPU stream.

Setting up communication with NCCL
Before any communication happens, NCCL needs a way for all processes to find a
common meeting point. This meeting point is represented by a piece of data called
the NCCL Unique ID.
Only one process can generate this ID, Every single process that wants to be part of
the group must possess this exact same ID.
Rank 0 asks NCCL to create a new Unique ID, takes it and puts it into the PMIx
Key-Value Store (KVS) so that other processes can read.
Rank 0 tells PMIx to commit the data, ensuring it is actually pushed out to the server
and visible to the network. A fence ensures everyone can read the data and then
Followers check the Key Value Store and call NCCL initialization function

ncclGetUniqueId
When we begin the GPUs don’t know about any other GPU in their surroundings
and how to reach them using nvlink/infiniband.
To communicate with other GPUs NCCL needs to build a ‘communicator’
NCCL calls ncclGetUniqueId to create ncclUniqueId struct and logs in the ip
address of the first GPU. Now every GPU comes in and logs its own IP in this struct
to communicate
We will see how to use PMIx to do this

usage

NCCL is very fast, but it doesn't know where the other GPUs are when it starts.
Different processes are running on different GPUs. They have separate memory.
Process B cannot see variables inside Process A.
We need to ensure that data committed by participants is “collected” and made
available according to scope rules (e.g., PMIX_GLOBAL). We create a fence where
nobody returns until everyone has arrived.
Then every single process needs to find the key value store, for that we must
specify who owns it. To do that we use the nspace of the processes and set rank 0.
We use PMIx_Get to get the key which we posted through PMIx_Put, this key serves
no security or verification purpose; it is purely for addressing the data.
Once that’s done we copy the NCCL unique ID bytes out of PMIx’s temporary buffer
into our own local ncclUniqueId id variable.

ncclCommonInitRank
This is the most expensive and complex function in the setup phase. It is where the
ID maps to Hardware Connections, we log IDs of nrank ranks to the GPU0
Every rank looks at the ncclUniqueId struct. It extracts the IP:Port of Rank 0.
Every rank creates a standard TCP socket and connects to Rank 0.
Rank 0 waits until it receives exactly nranks connections.
It's a barrier. If Rank 799 is slow, everyone waits here.
Once the TCP connections are alive, they don't send data yet. They send metadata
about their rank, connection type, device etc.

The next steps
Rank 0 acts as the architect. It analyzes the global graph to find the path with the
highest bandwidth and lowest latency for operations like AllReduce.
It prioritizes NVSwitch for intra-node communication. It selects specific InfiniBand
NICs for inter-node jumps. It decides whether to build Rings (latency-optimized) or
Trees (bandwidth-optimized) for the communication pattern.
Rank 0 sends the specific "routing table" (who to send to, who to receive from) back
to every rank. Inside a single node, Ranks map each other’s memory. Configure the
NVSwitch to allow direct GPU-to-GPU memory access
Ranks identify their paired peers on other nodes and RDMA Handshake to ensure
they can write directly into each other's memory buffers without CPU involvement.

ncclCommDestroy
Its the way to dismantling hardware paths we created earlier
It marks the communicator object as invalid for future kernel launches. If the GPU is
currently executing an NCCL kernel (like an AllReduce inside a CUDA stream),
ncclCommDestroy will not yank the memory out from under it immediately. It relies
on internal reference counting
The 4MB-8MB scratchpad buffers in HBM that were allocated during Init are freed.
The staging areas in CPU RAM used for PCIe transfers are released
NvLink Mappings and Infiniband Queue Pairs are destroyed

NCCL Collective Primitives
On an H100 cluster we don't think in terms of send and receive. We think in terms of
patterns of data manipulation across the NVLink fabric. Here are big 6 primitives
Broadcast — one GPU copies its data to all GPUs.
Reduce — all GPUs combine data, result lands on one GPU.
AllReduce — all GPUs get the reduced sum of everyone’s data.
AllGather — GPUs start with fragments, end with the full combined buffer.
ReduceScatter — reduce first, then split output so each GPU gets a different chunk.
All-to-All — every GPU sends a piece to every other GPU, and receives pieces back

4 Important types of parallelism in AI
There are 4 types of parallelism which one deals with when working with AI
applications in these multi GPU systems
1.
2.
3.
4.

Data Parallelism
Tensor Parallelism
Pipeline Parallelism
Expert Parallelism

Let’s discuss each one of them in detail

Data parallelism
Data parallelism is the most common distributed training strategy used in deep
learning. It allows you to train a model faster by distributing the input data across
multiple GPUs, while replicating the model itself on every device
A copy of the entire model is placed on every GPU. The global batch of training data
is split into smaller "mini-batches". Each GPU receives its unique slice of data. Every
GPU performs forward and backward passes on its own piece of data. Before the
optimizer updates the model weights, the system must ensure that every model
copy stays identical. The gradients from all GPUs are aggregated (usually
averaged).
For Data Parallelism, strictly speaking, you primarily rely on AllReduce, but
Broadcast is essential for initialization

NCCL operations involved
AllReduce is the single most important operation in Data Parallel training. It
happens at the end of every backward pass. GPU 1 has gradient g1, GPU 2 has
gradient g2, etc. We need every GPU to have the average gradient (1/N)∑gi.
AllReduce sums up vectors from all GPUs and distributes the result back to all
GPUs.
Broadcast is typically used at the very beginning of training or when resuming
from a checkpoint. During weight initialization, Rank 0 initializes the parameters
and Broadcasts them to all other ranks. This guarantees that at step 0, all replicas
are mathematically identical

Tensor Parallelism
If you try to load a model that is too big for a single GPU, the program will simply
crash before computation even begins. Tensor Parallelism is used when the
weight matrices are so big that you can’t do matrix multiplies in a single GPU
If you are training the model (not just running it), the memory requirements triple
or quadruple. You don't just store the weights; you need to store gradients,
optimizer states, activations.
What we do here is that we divide our matrix into pieces and distribute it to
different GPUs for computation. Once the computation is done then we put all
the results together.

Sequence parallelism
In standard Tensor Parallelism, we split the heavy Matrix Multiplications (Linear
Layers) across GPUs. However, we do not split the operations that occur between
the Linear Layers, specifically: LayerNorm, Dropout, GeLU/SiLU activations
In standard TP, the output of the AllReduce (after a Linear Layer) is a replicated
tensor. This means if you have 8 GPUs, every single GPU stores an identical copy of
the full activation matrix (size: [Sequence Length, Hidden Dimension]) just to perform
LayerNorm or Dropout.
LayerNorm acts on the Hidden Dimension of a single token. It is independent across
the Sequence Dimension. Thus we don't need to replicate the full sequence on every
GPU. We can partition the sequence across GPUs for these operations.

Breaking the allreduce on TP
Standard TP uses AllReduce to synchronize the output of a matrix multiplication.
Mathematically, AllReduce is actually a composition of two primitive operations:
AllReduce = ReduceScatter + AllGather
When using SP, instead of doing the AllReduce atomically (NCCL fusion), SP injects
the LayerNorm/Dropout operations inside the communication loop
We perform the ReduceScatter, stop there, do our LayerNorm on the sharded data,
and only AllGather later when we absolutely need the full data for the next Matrix
Multiplication.

NCCL operations involved in TP
Broadcast: Used in Column-wise sharding to copy complete input matrices to each
worker.
All-Gather: Used in Column-wise sharding to combine the results after multiplication,
Used in Sequence Parallelism during the forward pass to combine sharded sequence
chunks.
All-Reduce: Used in Row-wise sharding to sum the results from different workers for
the final result. In a standard Transformer block, Tensor Parallelism implies two
all-reduce per transformer block (one for the Attention block and one for the
Feedforward block).
Reduce-Scatter: Used in Sequence Parallelism to reduce gradients while scattering
along the sequence dimension. In TP, Reducescatter is used for gradients during the
backward pass of a column linear operation.

Pipeline parallelism
If Tensor Parallelism is slicing a single layer horizontally, Pipeline Parallelism is
slicing the model vertically (splitting the stack of layers).
By splitting the model layers across different GPUs, each GPU only needs to store
the parameters and optimizer states for its specific chunk of layers.
If you simply passed one large batch through the pipeline, most GPUs would sit
idle waiting for their turn. Pipeline Parallelism breaks a large batch of data into tiny
micro-batches. As soon as GPU 1 finishes the first micro-batch, it passes it to
GPU 2 and immediately starts working on the second micro-batch
Because PP only requires communication between "neighbors" in the pipeline, it
only uses point to point send receive operations.

Expert parallelism
Unlike standard "dense" models where every parameter is used for every input,
MoE models activate only a small subset of parameters (experts) for each input.
This is good for cost. You can increase the parameter count by 100x (adding more
experts), but if you only select the top-2 experts per token, the compute cost
remains relatively low.
The model learns that certain "experts" are good at coding, while others are good
at creative writing. Expert parallelism ensures that when a coding token comes in, it
is routed specifically to the device holding the "coding expert."

How expert parallelism works
A small network decides if the token needs expert A or expert B etc.
Experts are distributed across GPUs. GPU 1 holds Expert A & B. GPU 2 holds
Expert C & D. GPU 3 holds Expert E & F and so on
If a token on GPU 1 needs Expert D (which is on GPU 2), it must be sent over the
network to GPU 2. Eventually every GPU needs to send data to every other GPU.
This is called “all to all” communication.
Specialized libraries like DeepEP expertise on such situations by bundling data to
send efficiently across the inter node connections first, then distributing it quickly
locally with faster nvlink connections.

General format of NCCL operations

sendbuff, recvbuff, count, datatype tell the GPU how many elements to move

and how to interpret them.
op tells what math operation to perform
comm is the communication handle storing all the metadata for the node and cluster
stream helps specify the asynchronous behavior

Broadcast
The Broadcast operation in NCCL is a collective communication primitive where a
single "Root" GPU sends a tensor of data to every other GPU in the
communicator.
Generally it was implemented using a ring/tree operation but with H100 DGX, the
Root GPU sends the data packet once to the NVSwitch. The NVSwitch itself
physically replicates the packet to all 7 other ports (in a single node)
simultaneously.
Because the switch handles the replication, the time to broadcast to 8 GPUs is
roughly the same as sending to just 1 GPU.

ncclBroadcast

root: this is the rank of GPU holding the data we want to broadcast
sendbuff: this is the location of the buffer of data we want to broadcast
recvbuff: The destination pointer on all GPUs (including the root)(if they are same

then in place reduction is enabled).

Datatype: if you pass ncclFloat8e4m3 or ncclFloat8e5m2, NCCL switches to using

Hopper-specific intrinsic instructions
comm: The communicator object
stream: The CUDA stream

The math of the operation
Let P={0,1,…,N−1} be the set of N processes (GPUs) in the communicator. Let V(i)
represent the data vector held by process i.

Reduction
Reduction takes an array of data from every participating GPU, combines them
using a mathematical operator (like sum or max), and stores the single
consolidated result on a specific GPU (or all of them).
In previous systems, GPUs had to pass data between each other (like a bucket
brigade) to sum it up. In the DGX H100, the NVSwitch chips themselves perform
the math, offloading the work from the GPUs.
the general reduction (ncclReduce) typically uses NVLSTREE (introduced in NCCL
2.18+) to handle the specific flow of reducing data to a single root, especially
when scaling across multiple nodes

ncclReduce

You use ncclReduce when the consumer of the data is centralized (usually Rank
0) and the other ranks do not need the result to proceed immediately.
It is generally used in the last layer during inference when only Rank 0 needs the
full logits to perform argmax or top-k sampling.
The count is the number of elements each GPU contributes. The root receives
exactly count elements.

Let P be the number of processors (GPUs), indexed 0 to P−1. Each processor p
holds an input vector Vp of size N:
Vp=[vp,0,vp,1,…,vp,N−1]

AllReduce
AllReduce is one of the most important operations in training of AI models
Combines data from N GPUs -> get a global result -> distributes to N GPUs
All 8 GPUs read their local gradients from their HBM3 memory
Instead of sending data to a peer GPU, all 8 GPUs simultaneously push their data
onto the NVLink lanes, targeting the NVSwitch chips
The data goes to switch where the reduction happens “in flight” the switch
immediately multicasts this result back to all 8 GPUs simultaneously.
The result lands directly in the destination buffer in HBM3 on all GPUs.

ncclAllReduce

This is one of the most popular and important operation for deep learning use
cases
AllReduce is the right primitive when every participant both contributes data and
needs the final reduced result, such as gradient or metric aggregation across
workers

ncclRedOp_t
This is the mathematical operation for reduction(ncclSum, ncclProd, ncclMin,
ncclMax, ncclAvg)
ncclSum is the only operator that is fully optimized for every hardware path on

H100. If you use this NCCL will offload all the operation to nvswitch
ncclMin and ncclMax are also offloaded from hardware(fp8)

ncclProd will offload all the operations to tensor cores because nvswitch can’t do

floating point multiplications
ncclAvg is done in two parts, the sum part done in nvswitch and the division is

done in GPUs

Math of AllReduce
Let there be P processes. Each process k holds a vector Vk of size N. Let Vk[i]
denote the i-th element of the vector on process k.
The goal of AllReduce is for every process k to end up with a result vector R,
where the i th element is the sum (or other associative operator ⊕) of that element
across all processes

this is used to sum gradients: Vk is the gradient vector calculated by GPU k, and R
is the total gradient used to update the model.

ReduceScatter
ReduceScatter is an operation where every GPU starts with a full buffer of gradients,
and the goal is to sum these buffers across all GPUs, but then scatter the results so
that each GPU ends up holding only a distinct "slice" of the final summed vector
Input: Each GPU has a vector [A,B,C,D].
Math: Element-wise sum across all GPUs
Output:
GPU 0 holds Sum(Part A)
GPU 1 holds Sum(Part B)
GPU 2 holds Sum(Part C)
GPU 3 holds Sum(Part D)

ncclReduceScatter

size_t recvcount: This is the element count of the output buffer, not the total

input buffer. You get this by total elements in gradients buffer / number of GPUs
Total Elements Reduced = recvcount * nranks

If you have a total vector size of 100 and 3 GPUs: You cannot divide 100 by 3 evenly
(33.33...). NCCL does not support "jagged" arrays where GPU 0 gets 34, and GPU 1
gets 33. Thus you must pad your data to the next multiple of the GPU count

The math of ReduceScatter

AllGather
AllGather is an operation where every GPU starts up with different pieces of the
gradients and after the transformation every GPU gets the complete copy of the
whole data
All 8 GPUs push their gradients into the NVSwitch fabric simultaneously
The NVSwitch combines the data and route the result to all the GPUs
Total bus utilization is maximized. You get closer to the theoretical 900 GB/s
aggregate throughput because you aren't waiting for a "ring" to cycle

sendcount is the number of elements this rank contributes (the size of its local

slice). Every rank ends up with all ranks’ slices in recvbuff.

Mathematically

All to All
Every GPU holds data for every other GPU in the node and it transfers that data to
its respective GPU
The way it works is that each GPU receives its piece of data from every GPU and it
sends data which belongs to every GPU
Unlike AllReduce, which often uses complex Ring or Tree algorithms and hardware
offloading (SHARP), AllToAll on this system is physically simpler but
bandwidth-intensive.

Assume nranks = N GPUs in a communicator.
You have a send buffer logically split into N blocks: block j is the data you want to
send to rank j.
After all-to-all, each rank has a receive buffer split into N blocks: block i contains
what rank i sent to you.
So it’s like doing N×(N−1) point-to-point transfers (plus self) but coordinated and
optimized as one collective.

The MOE problem
Using NCCL’s standard AllToAll for MoE models is generally avoided because it was
designed for static, bulk synchronous communication, whereas MoE routing is
inherently dynamic, sparse, and latency-sensitive.
Major problems with NCCL All to all include NCCL being CPU-driven (Host API),
NCCL using static data sizes, NCCL requiring data in contagious blocks and just the
blocking nature of the instruction.
Specialized libraries like DeepEP (and the underlying NVSHMEM primitives) are
preferred because they allow for device-initiated, fine-grained data movement that
can handle the irregular traffic patterns of expert routing without stalling the GPU.

ncclGroupStart ncclGroupEnd
In a distributed system a lot of times you have a single CPU thread managing
multiple GPUs. when CPU launches a NCCL instruction the CPU will be blocked by
NCCL if its a blocking call. Most NCCL collective calls (like ncclAllReduce) are
asynchronous from the CPU, The more blocking parts are often communicator
initialization (ncclCommInitRank),
If one host thread is issuing NCCL calls for multiple GPUs, launching them
one-by-one can create partial states where some participants have started an
operation while others haven’t been issued yet which can lead to hangs
ncclGroupStart()/ncclGroupEnd() let you batch a set of NCCL calls: NCCL collects
the calls during the group and then submits them together at ncclGroupEnd(). This
avoids problems caused by partially launched NCCL work.

ncclSend

It is a non-blocking operation used to send data from one specific GPU (the
sender) to another specific GPU (the receiver). It is almost always paired with a
corresponding ncclRecv on the target device.
peer: The rank (ID) of the destination GPU.
NCCL finds the fastest physical path available between the two GPUs, can be
using NVLink, PCIe or IB RDMA

ncclRecv

Tells a specific GPU to allocate space in its memory and wait for incoming data
from a designated "peer." It is asynchronous, meaning the CPU resumes control
immediately after the command is enqueued on the CUDA stream
peer: The rank (ID) of the GPU that is sending the data.
A ncclRecv must have a matching ncclSend on the source GPU. If you are doing
multiple P2P transfers, they must be enqueued in a compatible order across the
different GPUs to avoid circular dependencies

Prevent all GPUs from launching the same instruction

Probably end here



--- END OF 10. Multi GPU  Part 2.pdf ---


Clusters, Data types, inline
PTX, pointers
Prateek Shukla

What are thread block clusters
Cluster is a collective of up to 16 thread blocks that are guaranteed to be
co-scheduled concurrently on adjacent SMs in a GPC
This extends the traditional CUDA programming hierarchy from three levels to
four explicit levels: threads → thread blocks → thread block clusters → grid
All blocks in a cluster run concurrently on SMs that are physically close together,
enabling efficient cross-SM cooperation
The reason of using a cluster is for most of the time using distributed shared
memory for different purpose.

Each thread block is constrained by the limited shared memory and
computational resources available on a single SM.
If the thread wants to access more data it needs to go to global memory to fetch
it which is expensive
For operations like top-k or matrix multiplication that require accessing data from
thread blocks executing on different SMs, thread block clusters provide a
solution.
They enable algorithms to trade modest memory bandwidth for significantly
expanded data accessibility across multiple SMs

All that we do is take all the thread blocks and pool some of their memory. Now
threads from different blocks can access the data which they need without
needing to access the global memory
This pool is not pool in the sense that all the threads just pour all their shared
memory allocated into a single thing. Each block still owns its piece of shared
memory, the difference is that now the threads can go down and access other
block’s memory
Generally this pool is small and constrained inside a GPC

A few important points
A threadblock still runs on a single SM - the one-to-one relationship hasn't
changed
SMs can run multiple threadblocks simultaneously - this was always possible and
remains true
Clusters are a software concept, GPC is a hardware concept
No automatic assignment: You must explicitly define clusters in code; the
scheduler won't group blocks automatically

On cluster sizes
With a cluster size of 8 thread blocks, the hardware can fit two clusters per GPC,
utilizing roughly 16 SMs per GPC efficiently
Mention that using cluster size > 8 requires explicitly setting
cudaFuncAttributeNonPortableClusterSizeAllowed at kernel launch. For size 8 or
smaller, the code remains portable
With a cluster size of 16 thread blocks, only one cluster fits per GPC, leaving
approximately 1-2 SMs idle per GPC or roughly 18 SMs unused across the entire GPU
Cluster size 2 have been found a lot more optimal as there is a hidden synchronization
cost to larger clusters (87 cycles for size 4+ and 150 cycles for size 16)

What is Distributed Shared Memory
Feature in H100 which allows a direct memory accesses between SMs within a
thread block cluster
H100 implements a dedicated SM-to-SM network for clusters that provides fast,
low-latency access to remote shared memory which enables SMs to perform
load, store and Atomic operations across the shared memory of other SMs
DSMEM can be used simultaneously with L2 cache accesses. This allows
applications to utilize the combined bandwidth of both pathways when
communicating data between SMs

Multicast and TMA with DSMEM
We can use TMA for asynchronous copy operations with DSMEM
One of the most important features of DSMEM are multicast operations that
deliver data to multiple SMs' shared memory simultaneously
TMA multicast bypasses the SM-to-SM network bottleneck we discussed earlier.
Instead of threads explicitly writing and reading across DSMEM (causing
congestion and synchronization overhead), a single thread per cluster can issue a
TMA multicast operation to distribute data to all SMs at once

Creating thread block clusters
You can define cluster dimensions at compile time using the __cluster_dims__
attribute in your kernel declaration

Once defined you can launch the kernel normally but the grid dimensions must
be a multiple of cluster size

Cluster handlers
#include <cooperative_groups.h> (cooperative groups help manage
clusters)
namespace cg = cooperative_groups;
cg.:cluster_group cluster = cg.:this_cluster();

creates a handle to the thread block cluster that the currently executing thread
belongs to
int* remote_smem = cluster.map_shared_rank(smem, target_block_rank);
remote_smem[idx] = value;
unsigned int cluster_size = cluster.num_blocks();
unsigned int cluster_rank = cluster.block_rank();

But we are not gonna use it a lot.
We will generally use mapa to
convert the shared memory
address to address in clusters

PTX special registers
These provide information about thread blocks in the cluster
%cluster_ctaid: CTA ID within the cluster
%cluster_nctaid: the dimensions of the cluster
%cluster_ctarank: linearized rank of the CTA in the cluster
%cluster_nctarank: Total number of CTAs in the cluster
%is_explicit_cluster: Differentiates explicit vs implicit (1×1×1) cluster launch

Parallel Thread Execution
PTX is the assembly language of Nvidia GPUs and serves as an Instruction set
architecture in the CUDA ecosystem
When CUDA C++ files are compiled they translate into PTX which then jit compiles
into SASS which is then assembled into binaries
We are learning PTX because it enables direct access to low-level GPU features
that are not directly exposed in CUDA C/C++ which will help us to hand optimize
performance critical sections
Its widely used in a lot of famous repositories and learning PTX allows you to get
to know all kinds of optimizations in highly optimized libraries

Inline PTX
Inline PTX is PTX assembly code that is embedded directly within CUDA C/C++
using asm keyword
We use inline PTX because it reduces a lot of heavy lifting in hand writing
everything from scratch in PTX and allows writing PTX instructions inside c++
code
Templates enable to embed parameterized compile-time constants directly into
GPU instructions which is why often times we would use templates with inline
instructions

The format of PTX instructions
- asm() inserts the ptx code into your cuda program
- Adding volatile keyword after asm prevents the compiler from deleting or
moving your ptx instruction
- If you don’t want compiler to see the way you access memory use memory
keyword in the clobbers section

Input and output operands
Input and output operands are the bridge between your C++ variables and the
assembly instructions. They use a constraint-based syntax to tell the compiler
how to map variables to registers or memory
Output operands are declared first after the instruction string, then input
operands and then clobbers
Operands are numbered sequentially across outputs and then inputs
If you don’t have output you can leave fields empty like asm(“string”.: inputs)

Constraint modiﬁers
`=` - Write only
`+` - read and write only
`&` - Early clobber - prevents the compiler from using the same register for an
output and a subsequent input. Critical when output is written before all inputs
are consumed

Constraints
`h` - 16 bit unsigned integers
`r` - 32 bit unsigned integer used for 32 bit addresses and unsigned integers
`l` - 64 bit unsigned integer and 64 bit addresses
`f` - 32 bit floating point number
`d` - 64 bit floating point numbers
`n` - immediate integer(the compile time constant)

Some more points about operands
We represent the operands in text order like %0, %1, %2
So %0 would represent the first variable after the instruction string
We represent the variables using the constraint modifier and constraints(“+r”,
“=f”, “+l” for output and “r”, “l”, “f” for inputs)
Curly braces are used for local register scoping {}

The instruction string
- This is the string containing actual instructions which we want to run on the gpu
- Instructions can be written in a single line or multiple lines using newline
- You can use placeholders like %0, %1 etc to represent the operands which will be
replaced by the actual operands used in the assembly which we after :

asm volatile("wgmma.mma_async {%0, %1, %2, ...}")

Output operands
They come after the instruction string
Use special modifiers and constraints to represent the output
Use comma separated outputs to represent multiple outputs
If there is no output operand leave the field empty (like ::)

Input operands
Represented after output operands separated by colon
You can have either read only input operands (“n”, “r”, “f”, “l”) or read and
write operands (“+n”, “+r”, “+f”) but not write only operands
You can use “+n” constraint to get the compile time operands
You can use multiple input operands by separating them with commas and
putting them after the output operands

Clobbers
They tell the compiler what resources might get modified apart from the output
operands
This prevents the compiler from making wrong assumption and modify the code
incorrectly.

What are state spaces in CUDA
State spaces in CUDA refer to different memory regions that are accessible by
GPU threads, each optimized for specific purposes
When writing code in PTX we need to specify for which state spaces we are
launching instructions
They're not just a low-level PTX detail. They're the reason we can write high
performance code by making memory placement a first class decision, not an
afterthought

Register State Space (.reg)
The register memory
you need explicit .reg declarations when you require temporary registers that
aren't covered by the input/output constraint system.
Spilling mechanism: When register usage exceeds hardware limits, variables
automatically spill to local memory, which can significantly impact performance.

Global State Space (.global)
Represents the global memory
For different operations which use data from global memory

Local State Space (.local)
Per-thread private memory: Each thread has its own private local memory space
for storing data that doesn't fit in registers.
Rarely used

Parameter State Space (.param)
Dual-purpose usage: Serves as kernel input parameters (read-only, per-grid) and
device function parameters (read/write, per-thread).
Argument passing mechanism: Used to pass arguments to kernels and functions
without using the general register file.

Again not used a lot

Shared State Space (.shared)
Represents the shared memory
Cluster wide accessibility: With sub-qualifiers (::cta or ::cluster), can be accessed
by threads in other CTAs within the same cluster for advanced communication

The data types
Unsigned integer types - .u8, .u16, .u32, .u64
Signed integer types - .s8, .s16, .s32, .s64
Floating point types - .f16, .f32, .f64
Raw bit patterns - .b8, .b16, .b32, .b64, .b128
Predicate type - store TRUE or FALSE values

Some important datatypes in deep learning
bf16(stored as .b16): 8-bit exponent, 7-bit mantissa (16 bits total)
e4m3, e5m2(stored as .b8): 8-bit Float Formats (4-bit exponent + 3-bit mantissa,
or 5-bit exponent + 2-bit mantissa)
tf32(stored as .b32) - 32-bit format with same range as .f32 but reduced precision
(≥10 bits mantissa)
4-bit Float (e2m1)
Ultra-compact: 2-bit exponent, 1-bit mantissa (4 bits total)

Packed data types
These pack multiple values into a single register for parallel operations:
.u16x2, .s16x2 - Holds two 16-bit integers in a 32-bit register (.b32)
.f16x2 - Holds two .f16s
.bf16x2 - holds two BF16
.e4m3x2 - holds two e4m3
.e5m2x2 - holds two e5m2

What are memory addresses really
The entire memory of the GPU as one infinitely long ruler. The smallest unit of
memory you can have an address for is a Byte (8 bits) this is also called an atom.
The address is the distance in bytes from the start of the ruler. Byte Address is the
raw integer index on the ruler
In CUDA, you rarely work with raw bytes. You work with types (float, int, bf16).
When you write ptr + 1, the compiler does not move 1 byte. It moves 1 element.

The shared memory and the banks
To allow 32 threads (a warp) to access memory simultaneously, shared memory is
divided into 32 discrete memory banks. The bank indexes from 0 to 31 and each
bank is 4 bytes wide.
The GPU determines which bank an address belongs to based on the 4-byte word
index.

(Bytes 0-3): Stored in Bank 0
(Bytes 4-7): Stored in Bank 1
(Bytes 8-11): Stored in Bank 2
(Bytes 12-15): Stored in Bank 3 and so on

Bank Conflicts
The hardware can only serve one unique address per bank per clock cycle. If 2
threads conflict, the access is serialized (takes 2x as long). If 32 threads conflict
(worst case), it takes 32x as long.
If multiple threads read the exact same address, there is no conflict. The hardware
performs a multicast/broadcast, serving all threads in 1 cycle. A Bank Conflict
occurs when multiple threads in the same warp try to access different addresses
that map to the same bank.
The H100 memory controller processes requests in 128-byte transactions
If your warp requests more than 128 bytes total (e.g., every thread loads a 16-byte
float4), the request is split into multiple transactions (waves).

Origin of swizzling
Because the H100 relies on Tensor Cores (which read 64x64 tiles of data), standard
linear addressing often creates massive bank conflicts (strided access).
If you have a 64×64 tile of bf16 numbers.
Row size: 64 elements×2 bytes=128 bytes.
Bank capacity per row: 32 banks × 4 bytes = 128 bytes.
Every column in your matrix lines up perfectly in the same bank((128/4) mod(32))
We want to make sure that Matrix[0][0] and Matrix[1][0] land in different banks,
even though their stride is a perfect multiple of the bank width

Pointers and state spaces
The Unified Virtual Addressing (UVA) system maps each state space to a
non-overlapping region:
0x0000000000000000 -> 0x0000FFFFFFFFFFFF (Reserved)
0x0001000000000000 -> 0x0001FFFFFFFFFFFF (Global memory)
0x0002000000000000 -> 0x0002FFFFFFFFFFFF (Local memory per context)
0x0003000000000000 -> 0x0003FFFFFFFFFFFF (Shared memory per block)
0x0004000000000000 -> 0x0004FFFFFFFFFFFF (Constant memory)

Generic pointers
In modern CUDA (Compute Capability ≥ 3.5), all pointers are generic by default they're 64-bit addresses in a single unified virtual address space spanning all state
spaces
There is no runtime checking to determine what state space we’re in
Can do all the normal arithmetic like the pointers in CPU
When a generic pointer is dereferenced, the hardware checks the high bits to
route the request to the correct memory subsystem, this results in a few lost
cycles in runtime space detection

State Space pointers
When you write inline PTX or compiler generates it, pointers can be qualified with
their state space
NOT a pointer just raw bits meaningful to specific hardware instructions
Cannot be dereferenced in C++ (*(float*)shared_bits would crash or give garbage)
No runtime space detection hardware knows it's shared memory immediately
Enables specialized instructions that require explicit space qualification

cvta convert to address
cvta (Convert To Address) is a PTX (Parallel Thread Execution) instruction that
converts pointers between generic addresses and specific memory space
addresses.

The cuda c++ API for this
__cvta_generic_to_global
__cvta_generic_to_shared
__cvta_generic_to_local
__cvta_generic_to_constant

Where do we need these
Tensor Cores require explicit shared memory addresses for ldmatrix
TMA needs explicit space qualifications
Thread Block Clusters need precise space control for cross-SM data sharing, we
use cluster specific addresses to work with them
In Multi-Instance GPU (MIG) configurations , explicit address space conversions
help ensure proper memory isolation between GPU instances.

mapa and thread block clusters
Used for memory address conversion from shared memory in cta to distributed
shared memory

mapa converts a shared memory address from the current CTA's shared memory
space into the corresponding address in another CTA's shared memory within the
same cluster
Crucial point: It takes a rank, not a block ID!

Rank vs Block Id
Block ID (%ctaid): Global position in the grid (0 to N-1 across all clusters)
Rank (%cluster_ctarank): Position within the cluster (0 to cluster_size-1)



--- END OF 2. Clusters, Data types, inline PTX, State Spaces.pdf ---


Asynchronicity and barriers
Prateek Shukla

The systems in synchronous world
In any system there are two major operations
Doing: processing information, solving an equation, cooking food
Fetching: retrieving the data, reading, comprehending the question, bringing the
ingredients
In a synchronous world, these happen sequentially. You are "blocked" until the
current task finishes.
The synchronous way of cooking food is where while you are cooking food you are
not multitasking on any other work. Once the food is cooked then you go to the next
task. You are “blocked” from doing anything else

Asynchronicity decouples the Request from the Result.
While cooking food, you go out to work on something else and after some time at
some kind of signal you come back and use the ready food.
You accomplished two tasks in the time it took to do one. You have achieved
Latency Hiding.
If the cost of fetching a resource is higher than the time it takes to process it, you
must overlap the fetching of the next item with the processing of the current item.
The essence of latency hiding is not being “blocked” by an instruction and the
ability to put the current job in background and work on something else.

Blocking and non blocking operation
A blocking or synchronous operation pauses the execution of the launching thread
(e.g., the CPU host thread) until that operation has fully completed. Control does
not return to the thread, so it cannot proceed to the next line of code. This creates
an implicit synchronization point, guaranteeing the task is finished before the host
continues
A non-blocking or asynchronous operation returns control immediately to the
launching thread, before the operation has actually finished.

Asynchrony in GPUs
In modern computing, "Doing" (Math/Compute) is incredibly fast. "Fetching"
(Memory Access) is agonizingly slow in comparison.
The time it takes to fetch the data is much higher than the time it takes to compute
on that data. Thus the goal of high performance architecture is not just to make
the math faster; it is to ensure the math never stops.
The Nvidia H100 is often praised for its raw speed (FLOPS), but its true genius
lies in its architecture of asynchronicity. It is designed to ensure that its massive
Tensor Cores never have to wait for the data. This is powered by using non
blocking instructions for tensor cores and TMA

Async operations follow this pattern
Stage 1: Initialization - A thread fires an asynchronous operation and immediately
goes off to the next instruction
Stage 2: Tracking and parallel execution - some part of system tracks the
operation (mbarrier for TMA, internal hardware scorecard for wgmma). While
these operations are working, other units work in parallel
Stage 3: Synchronization - Once the async operation is done operating in the
background

The synchronization step in H100
Warp launches instructions really fast in the order of a few nanoseconds
Once a async instruction reaches the execution unit, it attempts to read the
memory immediately
The bottleneck is the memory bandwidth. Moving data from HBM to shared
memory/registers is a high-latency operation which take a few hundred ns
compared to the logic core.

The two problems
Because the Issuer (~ns) is faster than the Memory Mover (~ hundreds of ns) tensor
cores would have to wait for a few hundred ns for the data to arrive if the instructions
for copy and compute are issued at the same time. Therefore there is a scope for
latency hiding
Also in a big kernel, where instruction queue is full of commands for data that hasn't
arrived yet, without some form of synchronization tensor cores might perform
operations before the data have even arrived.
We need a way to make sure that the right operations are done on right data and we
need to have a system where we can apply latency hiding

What exactly is mbarrier/semaphore
A hardware-accelerated synchronization primitive resident in Shared Memory
designed to track the completion of asynchronous memory transactions.
Unlike traditional barriers that block execution until threads arrive, an mbarrier blocks
execution until data arrives. It decouples the "Producer" (who issues the copy) from
the "Consumer" (who waits for the data), enabling split-phase, fire-and-forget memory
pipelines.
Producer sets the expected data transfer size in the barrier and then the hardware
does its job in the background and once the transaction is completed the barrier is
opened

Why is this a great solution
.The barrier forces the "fast" instruction launcher to respect the "slow" physical
hardware by
1. Making sure that the slower operations are launched independently from the
faster operations so that by the time the fast unit is launched we have the data
2. Have a way to prevent the fast execution unit from operating on the wrong data
And the way we do that is by using mbarrier.

The Big Picture

Proxies in CUDA
In the context of the NVIDIA H100 and the CUDA PTX memory model, Proxy is a
term used to distinguish who is performing memory operations.
If two memory operations happen in the same proxy (e.g., the Generic Proxy), the
hardware guarantees they are safe and ordered (mostly).
If operation A is in Proxy 1 and operation B is in Proxy 2, the hardware stops
checking. It assumes they are completely unrelated. It lets them run wild, out of
order, and in parallel

Generic proxy vs Async proxy
When you write a CUDA kernel, your thread executes instructions sequentially.
When the thread reads or writes memory, it is acting as the Generic Proxy. The
hardware guarantees that these operations happen in the order you wrote them
(mostly) within that specific thread.
The Async Proxy refers to the hardware mechanism performing bulk async copies
or tensor core math. When you issue a command like cp.async.bulk or wgmma,
the Generic Proxy (thread) just kicks off the command and immediately moves to
the next line of code.
The Async Proxy runs completely independently of the Generic Proxy. It does not
know what the thread is currently doing, and the thread does not automatically
know when the proxy is finished.

Read After Write
The Generic Proxy and Async Proxy have distinct paths to memory. The Generic
Proxy operates through the SM's L1 cache, while the Async Proxy bypasses the
L1 and interacts directly with the L2 cache or HBM.
Stores issued by the Generic Proxy are initially held in local store buffers or the L1
cache. They are not immediately visible to the rest of the system (including TMA).
If the Generic Proxy writes to a memory address and immediately triggers the
Async Proxy to read that same address, the Async Proxy will likely read stale data
from L2/DRAM because the new data is still stuck in the Generic Proxy's L1
This is called a read after write hazard

Write after read
A thread (or CTA) does a Generic Proxy read of address X, pulling X into L1 (or
otherwise “anchoring” an old version locally).
Later, an Async Proxy write updates X via L2/HBM, without updating/invalidating
the Generic Proxy’s L1 view. The Generic Proxy can keep operating on the stale
L1 line. Two common failure modes:
A later Generic Proxy store / writeback / eviction can clobber the newer value
written by the Async Proxy (stale line wins) or later Generic Proxy loads keep
returning the old value even though X was updated via Async Proxy.
This is called a write after read hazard or WAR

fences
A fence is an explicit ordering/visibility point that constrains how memory effects
become observable. You use it when the hardware might otherwise let things
“pass” each other especially with asynchronous operations that are not
automatically ordered with normal loads/stores the way you might assume
NVIDIA explicitly calls out that a proxy fence is required to synchronize across
proxies for proper ordering
Also these fences are scoped (e.g., .cta, .cluster, .gpu, .sys) and the scope
determines who must see the ordering, tied to a point of coherency in the
hierarchy (e.g., L1 vs L2).
There are two types of fences Ordinary fence and cross proxy fence

Release fence (producer-side)
A release fence enforces this one-way rule:
All memory operations (especially writes) that appear before the release in
program order become visible-before anything that appears after the release to
other threads that synchronize with it (at the chosen scope).
It prevents earlier writes from being delayed/reordered past the release point.

Acquire fence (consumer-side)
An acquire fence enforces the opposite one-way rule:
No memory operation that appears after the acquire in program order (especially
reads) is allowed to be observed as happening before it.
After the acquire, the thread is guaranteed to observe the writes that were made
visible by a matching release (again, within the chosen scope/proxy).

Cross proxy fence
If you access the same location across multiple proxies, you need a cross-proxy
fence. For the async proxy, use fence.proxy.async to synchronize memory
between generic and async proxy.
It drains/orders the generic-proxy shared-memory write visibility so the async
proxy doesn’t read an older view.
it’s not a “collective flush.” It’s per-thread ordering, so you still need a block sync
so all writers have done it before the elected thread launches TMA (the CUDA
example uses __syncthreads() around the setup/coordination).

The whole mbarrier pipeline
Step 1: initialize the mbarrier in shared memory and use mbarrier.init to create a
barrier with expected thread arrival count. Thread arrival count make sure that a
specific number of threads have issued the copy instructions.
Step 2: Set the expected transaction count for the async op you are gonna launch,
using mbarrier.arrive. Everytime you do this you are logging an instruction thus
reducing the arrival count.
Step 3: launch the async operation
Step 4: launch other operations and wait (threads sleep till thread arrival and
expected_tx = 0)
Step 5: flip the phase, reset the arrival count, do the next operation

Phase and expected transaction count
A barrier's phase refers to its current reusable state or cycle. It is a single bit which
flips whenever the barrier completes a cycle.
Transaction count represent the size of the asynchronous operations which you
are performing. Expected transaction count is the amount of ‘work’ which is yet to
be done with the async operation.
Because these are async ops, the hardware automatically decrements the
transaction count as the async operation progresses. We attach the barrier to the
async operation to make sure of this behavior
You can ‘reuse’ a barrier by flipping its phase at the end of operation and
increasing the transaction count. The thread arrival count is automatically resetted
as per the value set during initialization.

Initializing the mbarrier
This is the only instruction where most bugs originate. Get this wrong, and nothing
else matters

addr is just the memory address of the mbarrier in the state space
Count is the expected thread arrival count in the barrier, this is the value to which
the barrier will reset when you reuse the barrier by flipping the phase.

Some things to keep in mind
Generally the scope is shared::cta so that only the threads in the same thread
block can “see” the barrier
The address is shared memory pointer which is created using __cvta
You can use shared::cluster to make the barrier visible to all the threads in a
cluster
You must use the mapa ptx instruction to get the address in the cluster
Mbarrier objects must be 64 bit aligned, unaligned access may cause silent
corruption

Setting expected transaction count

Decrementing the arrival count by 1
adding the expected transaction bytes with tx_count
The tx_count is added to the barrier's pending tx-count. If you call
arrive.expect_tx twice with 4096, the barrier expects 8192 bytes total

The placeholder _
The _ in the instruction is a placeholder for the phase_out which is the way to get a
64 bit encoded token which contains information about the current phase and
transaction count of the barrier
It was there for some complicated synchronization issues
We discard phase_out because we are actually writing this information into the
producer threads. Register pressure is expensive. it is cheaper to toggle a 1-bit
integer than writing a 64 bit token in registers.

Synchronization
So till now we have launched the async copy instruction but now how do we know
that the operation is completed.
The old way was barrier.sync which would block the thread until the operation
completes but that destroys asynchronicity
The way we do it in hopper is by having an instruction which can provide true or
false if the operation is completed. This allows Latency Hiding. A thread can check
the barrier, see it's not ready repeat until the operation ends and the phase flips.
This is precisely the job of mbarrier.try_wait.parity

mbarrier.try_wait.parity
You pass a phaseParity bit (0 or 1) into the instruction representing the specific
execution phase you must verify is fully completed before proceeding
The hardware compares your input parity bit against the mbarrier object’s current
internal parity state to determine if that specific phase is still active
If your input parity equals the barrier's current parity, the barrier is still processing
that phase, so the instruction returns false (keep waiting). If your input parity differs
from the barrier's current parity, the barrier has advanced to the next phase, so the
instruction returns true (proceed)
A successful return implies the barrier parity has "flipped," meaning your requested
parity now refers to the immediately preceding (and therefore completed) phase

The instruction

try_wait: The operation name. It implies an attempt that might involve a temporary
suspension of the thread.
waitComplete: (Destination) The boolean result.
1 (True): The barrier has reached the target phase (work is done).
0 (False): The barrier is not done, and the thread has just woken up
suspendTimeHint: Optional immediate value (constant) that tells the GPU scheduler
how long to yield the thread if the condition isn't met.
phaseParity: An integer (0 or 1) representing the phase generation you are waiting for.

mbarrier.test_wait.parity

test_wait.parity : The variant of the instruction. It tracks the barrier's progress using
a "phase parity" bit (0 or 1) rather than a raw integer count.
waitComplete: (Destination) A 1-bit predicate register (boolean). It receives 1 if the
barrier is done, 0 if it's still busy.
[addr]: (Source) The pointer/address to the mbarrier object in shared memory.
phaseParity: (Source) An integer (0 or 1) representing the phase generation you
are waiting for.

mbarrier wait with .acquire
It does everything which is there in mbarrier.try_wait with a critical distinction.
If the current synchronization round is fully finished, the .acquire semantic creates a
strict memory fence, ensuring that all data writes from the async proxy or other
threads are guaranteed visible before proceeding.
If you are loading data from Shared Memory into Registers (to feed a Tensor Core
manually), the .acquire ensures those LD instructions don't fire until the data is valid.
If they fire early, your registers get garbage.
Even though wgmma reads directly from Shared Memory, the instruction itself
requires descriptors and memory state to be consistent. The .acquire ensures the
dependency chain is respected

The complicated ways to implement it

An important point
In the producer warp which is launching the copies only a single thread is running
all the instructions like mbarrier.init, mbarrier.arrive.expect_tx, cp.async.bulk and
all that. Other threads in the warp are just lying around
The consumer warps are the ones which launch the wait operation as they are
waiting for the tma copy to complete so that they can work on the data

mbarrier reuse pattern

The phase is declared in registers
and not shared memory!
Each thread keeps its own int phase
phase ^= 1 as the last operation in loop

Is mbarrier only for async bulk copies??
Till now we discussed about mbarriers and cp.async.bulk and it really feels that
mbarriers are built for async bulk copies.
Consider this:
Producer writes to Shared Memory
Consumer reads from Shared Memory (using WGMMA).
Producer wants to overwrite that same Shared Memory with the next tile.
If the Producer overwrites sA while the WGMMA is still reading it, your math is
garbage. This is a Write-After-Read (WAR) hazard.

How do we prevent wars
We create a barrier with an expected thread arrival count
The Consumer is busy reading the data, producer is spinning on the barrier
The Consumer finishes its last read instruction
Consumer executes instruction to decrease the thread arrival count
The barrier state flips and now the producer can write the new data

The instruction to decrease the arrival count is ….

mbarrier.arrive.scope

Just decreases the pending arrival thread count of the barrier by count

Compilers and reordering
Compilers often reorder the operations in order to get some efficiency gains
a = 1;
b = 2;
c = a + b;
Compilers might do b = 2 before a = 1 because they think it does not affect the
whole c = a + b operation which uses them

Why this is fatal in async gpu ops
In multi-threaded code, reordering breaks correctness because different threads
can observe operations in different orders.
Thread a d[0][0] = 42.0f;
flag = 1;
Thread b while (flag == 0);
float x = d[0][0];

mbarrier.arrive.release.scope
The .release suffix provides release semantics. That means it acts as a one-way
hardware fence where memory writes above this line cannot reorder below it.
Use mbarrier.arrive.release after a thread finishes producing data that other
threads will consume:

Destroying a barrier

It formally invalidates an mbarrier object (a 64-bit synchronization primitive),
effectively wiping the hardware's tracking of that barrier's state.
By invalidating the barrier, it frees up the specific shared memory address so it can
be safely overwritten or repurposed for other variables later in the kernel.
It specifically converts a generic pointer to a 32-bit shared memory offset to
ensure the GPU hardware addresses the correct local memory bank.

The whole pipeline
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

mbarrier.init: Threads create a barrier in shared memory set an expected

thread count and start in Phase 0
mbarrier.expect_tx: producer threads tell the barrier to also expect a specific
number of bytes from an upcoming async operation
cp.async.bulk : A thread launches cp.async (the copy) and then
mbarrier.try_wait.parity 0, spins until Phase 0 is done
Flip: When all expected bytes (and threads) arrive, barrier auto-flips to phase 1
Computation begins
Once the computation ends we manually flip the phase and then start working on
the next k tile to reuse the barrier

mbarrier.arrive_drop
It acts like a standard arrive operation, decrementing the pending arrival count for
the current phase.
But more importantly it also permanently decrements the expected arrival count
for the barrier. So if you are flipping the phase and trying to reuse the barrier the
"expected arrival count" will be the previous value minus the number of drops that
occurred

.sem .expect_tx and .noComplete
arrive_drop.expect_tx: sets the expected transaction count and permanently and

temporarily decreases the arrival count by 1
arrive_drop.sem - sem can be .release or .relaxed. .relaxed Specifies that no

memory ordering is enforced and .release Ensures that all memory writes
performed by the thread before the arrival are visible to any thread that waits on
the barrier
.noComplete: instructs the hardware to perform the arrival (decrementing

pending/expected counts) without triggering the phase completion, even if the
conditions for completion (pending count reaching zero) are met.

barrier.cluster
Standard barriers like bar.sync (__syncthreads) only synchronize threads within a
single block. They cannot coordinate producer/consumer blocks across a cluster.
barrier.cluster is required to synchronize across different thread blocks that are

co-scheduled on the same cluster. It also guarantees that any writes to DSMEM
made before the barrier are visible to all blocks in the cluster after the barrier
The key usecase is TMA Multicast. The way it works is that in the initial step, the
block 0 might be running but block 1 might not be running and if block 0 tries to write
into block 1 then the program will crash. By launching this you make sure that every
block is physically present.

Two important instructions in barrier.cluster
barrier.cluster.arrive The thread signals it has reached the barrier. It does

not stop. It continues executing independent instructions (math, local register ops)
that don't depend on data from other blocks
barrier.cluster.wait this is a blocking instruction. The thread stalls here until

every other thread/block in the cluster has signaled arrive. Once this unblocks, you
are guaranteed that all data written by other blocks is now safe to read
On H100, Because Block A can write to Block B's memory, we need a barrier to
prevent Block B from reading before Block A has finished writing

Asynchronous groups
When you launch a cp.async.bulk operation using bulk group it looks something
like this -

Bulk_group is attached to a cp.async.bulk instruction and this enable us to use
cp.async.bulk.commit_group and cp.async.bulk.wait_group
These are the instructions which we are gonna use for batching a bunch of
instructions and then using them

cp.async.bulk.commit_group
The way pipeline works in here is that we launch a bunch of operations using
cp.async.bulk with bulk_group
Now there was no cp.async.bulk.commit_group operation which was done
before so these copies are uncommitted, we can commit i.e batch them into a
group, the point of batching them in a group is that we can later make other units
wait until the execution of N units is finished
Any instructions launched after this instructions belong to the next group or are
just instructions
We can have multiple groups with multiple cp.async.bulk operations

cp.async.bulk.wait_group<N>
Once we have launched and committed a bunch of operations then we need
other units which are gonna use their outputs to wait
The wait_group<N> instruction waits until at most N committed groups remain
pending. For example, wait_group<0> waits for all groups to complete, while
wait_group<2> tells you to wait till only the two operations out of all the ones
you launched are still pending.
The count refers to groups still pending, not groups that have completed. So
wait_group<2> means "wait until only the 2 most recent committed groups
are still pending" all the older groups must been completed

cp.async.bulk.wait_group.read
This stalls execution AND enforces an Acquire Fence.
This is really important for read-after-write scenarios because you risk reading the
older data

namedbarriers
__syncthreads() is a whole-block rendezvous. Named barriers let you create
multiple independent synchronization points inside one block, so different subsets
of warps can coordinate without forcing unrelated warps to stop.
PTX explicitly allows different warps to use the same named barrier with different
operations, such as mixing .arrive and .sync to build producer/consumer pipelines.

a = barrier ID, b = participating thread count



--- END OF 3. Asynchronicity and barriers.pdf ---


cuTensorMap
Prateek Shukla

What is TMA
TMA is the new unit which enables fully asynchronous data movements with
minimal thread involvement
A single thread launches TMA instructions and immediately continues execution,
the whole operation is handled by the hardware in the background
Instead of address calculation you get descriptors
TMA can transfer data to shared memory of multiple SMs simultaneously
Can handle 1d-5d tensors

How does H100 gets the perfect asynchronicity
We need all the units to be busy all the time
H100 gets it right by having multiple buffers loading using TMA and having tensor
cores do the operations simultaneously
The more important point is that you don’t need a lot of complex engineering.
Descriptors handle everything from data to layout to optimizations, leaving a lot of
the heavy lifting to the hardware

Why do we need Descriptors
Descriptors are the piece of the puzzle which enable the asynchronous nature of
H100.
In earlier times the whole fetching of data would happen using indexing where
threads would need to compute the address of the data which they wanted to
fetch and then data was fetched.
This was fixed a bit in ampere where the copy instruction was non blocking but
threads still had to compute the addresses for every 16 bytes. SMs were tethered
to the copy engine.
Now with H100s The descriptor encapsulates the entire transfer state. Because all
the information required to complete the job is contained in that 128-byte object in
memory, the hardware can do the job in the background without SM’s involvement

How to use TMA for copies
-

Use CUDA API to create a cuTensorMap
Encode it with information required
Launch the operation

cuTensorMap
It is a descriptor which stores the information about ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Memory base pointer (device address)
Tensor shape (number of elements per dimension)
Strides (in bytes)
Data type
Alignment and swizzling
Memory space (device, host, or unified)
Order and rank (up to 32 dimensions)
Optionally: tiling or “interleaved” layouts

Creating a tensormap object
CUtensorMap tma_desc;

Created in host memory as a local variable, it has a size of 128 bytes and It must
be 128B aligned. It is not a regular pointer but a specific data structure created by
nvidia
cuTensorMapEncodeTiled() function is used to encode the values in the

tensormap.

CUtensormap.
This is the tensormap object which we created using
CUtensorMap tma_desc which is gonna be filled with the encoded descriptor.

Determines the datatype of the actual data which you are gonna copy from HBM
TMA engine uses this to automatically get memory alignment and transfer size

Datatypes
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

CU_TENSOR_MAP_DATA_TYPE_UINT8 - Unsigned 8-bit integer
CU_TENSOR_MAP_DATA_TYPE_UINT16 - Unsigned 16-bit integer
CU_TENSOR_MAP_DATA_TYPE_UINT32 - Unsigned 32-bit integer
CU_TENSOR_MAP_DATA_TYPE_INT32 - Signed 32-bit integer
CU_TENSOR_MAP_DATA_TYPE_UINT64 - Unsigned 64-bit integer
CU_TENSOR_MAP_DATA_TYPE_INT64 - Signed 64-bit integer
CU_TENSOR_MAP_DATA_TYPE_FLOAT16 - 16-bit floating-point (half precision)
CU_TENSOR_MAP_DATA_TYPE_FLOAT32 - 32-bit floating-point (single precision)
CU_TENSOR_MAP_DATA_TYPE_FLOAT64 - 64-bit floating-point (double precision)
CU_TENSOR_MAP_DATA_TYPE_BFLOAT16 - 16-bit brain floating-point
CU_TENSOR_MAP_DATA_TYPE_FLOAT32_FTZ - 32-bit float with flush-to-zero mode
CU_TENSOR_MAP_DATA_TYPE_TFLOAT32 - TensorFloat-32 format
CU_TENSOR_MAP_DATA_TYPE_TFLOAT32_FTZ - TensorFloat-32 with flush-to-zero mode

Flush-to-zero (FTZ) mode is a floating-point arithmetic optimization that handles
denormalized (subnormal) numbers by replacing them with zero instead of
computing them normally.

Tensor Rank and Global Memory address
-

Tensor Rank is number of dimensions of the tensor, not the matrix rank from
linear algebra
Global Memory address is the memory address of the tensor in the HBM

The global address must be 16 byte aligned for efficient memory access patterns
in Hardware

Global Dimension (globalDim)
Array that specifies the size of each dimension of the tensor in terms of number of
elements (not bytes).
For a r dimension array we arrange data in following way
globalDim[0] = innermost dimension
globalDim[r] = outermost dimension

Note that every element of this array ranges from 0 to 2 ^ 32 (around 4 billion)

These are byte strides between elements in each dimension
how many bytes hardware must skip to move from one coordinate to the next
along specific dimensions.
The stride for the innermost dimension is implicit based on element size and the
size of this array is (rank - 1)
globalStrides[0] is the byte stride for globalDim[1] (second-innermost dim).
globalStrides[rank-2] is the byte stride for globalDim[rank-1] (outermost

dim).

It is the number of elements you want to skip along each dimension when you are
doing the async copy.
It is also an array of size rank and have specific requirements It must contain non zero values
Stride value should be less than or equal to 8
Array size = rank
Also it is calculated in number of elements and not bytes

It is the tile size. It is an array of size rank with one entry per tensor dimension
matching the tensor rank.
Specifies the size (in elements) of the traversal box the chunk of data transferred
per TMA operation from global memory to shared memory
Measured in elements (not bytes), corresponding to the data type being transferred
Inner dimension must be ≤ swizzle size

Swizzling and bank conflicts
On Hopper GPUs, shared memory is divided into 32 banks, each 4 bytes wide. All
32 banks can be accessed simultaneously in one cycle. However, if multiple
threads access the same bank, the accesses serialize causing bank conflicts
The normal way to access data in shared memory are strided access patterns the
problem with this way is that it hits the same bank each time which causes in
serialization
Swizzling is a hardware-accelerated XOR-based address permutation that
reorders data during transfer from global to shared memory. Let's break down the
full mechanism

How swizzling works
It's an address-mapping function. It takes the logical address (the GmemAddress
your program thinks it's writing to) and "shuffles" its bits to create a physical
address (the SmemAddress where the data actually lands).
We need to make the sequential access patterns and spread them across all the
banks to avoid conflicts
To do this we have 3 modes of swizzling 32B, 64B, 128B
The 128B, 64B, and 32B layouts define the span or chunk size of the memory
swizzling and, consequently, the size of the memory transactions. Choosing the
right layout is a critical performance tuning step based on your application's
memory access patterns.

The Atom
The Atom is the indivisible unit of data that the swizzler moves
The hardware doesn't shuffle byte-by-byte (too complex). It shuffles chunks.
Inside an Atom, data remains linear and contiguous.
Atom 16B: Standard. Matches 128-bit vector loads.
Atom 32B/64B: For specialized high-bandwidth instruction pipelines.
Your data access granularity cannot be smaller than the Atom size without penalty.

The span
The Span is the "Repeat Window" of the swizzle pattern.
The XOR pattern is calculated based on offsets within this span.
Once the address counter crosses the Span (e.g., 128 bytes), the XOR pattern
resets and repeats.
This defines the maximum contiguous width of your 2D tensor tile.

128B swizzling
Span = 128 Bytes, Atom = 16 Bytes
Takes bits [6:4] of the address (representing the 16B chunk index within 128B).
XORs them with bits [something_higher] to determine the bank group.
Why 128B? It aligns perfectly with the size of a standard cache line and the typical
"Phase" of a Warp's memory request (32 threads × 4 bytes = 128 bytes).
Mandatory for most FP16/BF16 Tensor Core usages.

The "Bounding Box" Constraint
Tensor_Inner_Dimension_Bytes ≤ Swizzle_Span
You use SWIZZLE_128B.
You try to copy a tile of width 256 Bytes
Bytes 0-127 get Swizzle Pattern A.
Bytes 128-255 get Swizzle Pattern A (Repeat).
Collision: A column access at Offset 0 and Offset 128 will hit the same bank again.
Fix: If your tile is wider than 128B, you must split the copy operation or use a larger span
(if supported).

High-Granularity Modes _ATOM_32B and _ATOM_64B
CU_TENSOR_MAP_SWIZZLE_128B_ATOM_32B

The "Block" being shuffled is now 32 bytes, not 16 bytes.
Optimized for specific data types that are naturally 32-byte aligned or for specific
instruction pipelines that consume 32 bytes/cycle per lane.
Reduces the "entropy" of the shuffle (fewer blocks to scramble), but simplifies the
address logic for larger transfers.

The "Flip" Mode _FLIP_8B
CU_TENSOR_MAP_SWIZZLE_128B_ATOM_32B_FLIP_8B

within the 32B atoms (i.e., every other 8 bytes), it physically swaps the lower 8
bytes ↔ upper 8 bytes based on specific bit patterns in the address. This flip is
NOT per alternate row in the logical tensor it's triggered by low address bits within
the 128B span, creating a fine-grained flip pattern across the tile
Engineered specifically for certain WGMMA layouts. When tensor cores load these
flipped 16B chunks into their internal register files, the data naturally lands in the
register-bank-friendly arrangement that the WGMMA datapath expects.
Minimizes tensor-core internal register bank conflicts (not shared memory banks),
maximizing instruction throughput/FLOPS.

32B swizzling
Each 32B request still triggers a full 128-byte L2 cache line allocation, but only 1
out of 4 sectors (32B) contains your tile data—resulting in ~25% cache line
utilization
Typically results in 4-way bank conflicts for standard WGMMA operations
Used where the inner dimension is exactly 16-32 elements (32-64 bytes for fp16),
fitting within one swizzle atom

64B swizzling
Each 64B request allocates a 128B cache line, using 2 out of 4 sectors
approximately 50% cache line utilization
The 64B swizzle pattern distributes data across SMEM banks more effectively
than 32B swizzle. For tiles with 64-byte inner dimensions, WGMMA operations
experience reduced bank conflicts when reading matrix fragments, but conflicts
are not fully eliminated unless you use 128B swizzle

Setting up swizzling

Interleaving
Data in Global Memory is not always linear. Libraries like cuDNN primarily use
primarily uses the NCHW memory layout for optimal GPU performance in
convolutions and other operations.
The CUtensorMapInterleave parameter informs the TMA how to decode the
address space. It maps the physical, interleaved arrangement in HBM to a logical,
linear reconstruction in Shared Memory
The Hopper TMA supports specific interleaving patterns designed for NC/xHWCx
layouts:
CU_TENSOR_MAP_INTERLEAVE_16B
CU_TENSOR_MAP_INTERLEAVE_32B

The two major modes
Layout: NC/8HWC8 (Vector of 8 channels).
Math: 8 channels×2 bytes (FP16)=16 bytes.
Behavior: Data is accessed in 16-byte interleaved chunks
Layout: NC/16HWC16 (Vector of 16 channels).
Math: 16 channels×2 bytes=32 bytes.
Behavior: Data is accessed in 32-byte interleaved chunks.
Note: If the channel count isn't a multiple of the slice, the last slice must be
zero-padded to maintain the interleave granularity.

Interleaving and swizzling
Coupling: Interleaving and Swizzling are not independent.
The Requirement: The documentation states:
"When interleave is CU_TENSOR_MAP_INTERLEAVE_32B, the swizzle parameter
must be set to CU_TENSOR_MAP_SWIZZLE_32B."
Reasoning: The hardware path for de-interleaving 32B chunks from Global
Memory feeds directly into the swizzling logic for 32B atoms in Shared Memory.
They operate in lockstep to map the complex global layout to a bank-conflict-free
shared layout

A few important points
If using 32B interleaving then your global address should be 32B aligned and if
using 16B interleaving then global address should be 16B aligned
Also your global strides should be a multiple of 16 if using 16B interleaving and
global strides should be multiple of 32 if using 32B interleaving
Also if you are using interleaving the dimensionality must be greater than or equal
to 3

Usage

L2 promotion
Fetching data from HBM is slow compared to fetching data from the L2 cache.
Prefetching anticipates future data needs by issuing non-blocking transfers from
HBM to L2 cache
Without promotion (CU_TENSOR_MAP_L2_PROMOTION_NONE), the memory controller
uses a standard cache line fetch size (typically 32 bytes). This is inefficient
because the L2 cache manages data in 128-byte lines.
By promoting the fetch size to 128B or 256B, a single TMA request ensures that a
larger contiguous block of data is brought into the L2 cache in one go.
This maximizes bandwidth efficiency for predictable patterns like GEMMs,
ensuring data is resident in L2 exactly when the compute units need it.

L2 Promotion Enumeration, Hardware Implications

CU_TENSOR_MAP_L2_PROMOTION_L2_64B and CU_TENSOR_MAP_L2_PROMOTION_NONE
CU_TENSOR_MAP_L2_PROMOTION_NONE: Uses the default 32-byte sector fetch. If

your tensor is very sparse or the stride is massive, fetching neighbors is wasteful.
Use this to avoid "over-fetching" (wasting bandwidth on useless data).
CU_TENSOR_MAP_L2_PROMOTION_L2_64B: Fetches two adjacent 32B sectors (64

bytes total).
useful for specific half (FP16) tensor shapes where the inner dimension is exactly
64 bytes (32 elements)

CU_TENSOR_MAP_L2_PROMOTION_L2_128B
Fetches the full 128-byte cache line in one shot.
Reduces DRAM command overhead by 75% (1 command instead of 4).
Alignment: Matches the standard vector load size of CUDA (ld.global.v4 = 16B ×
32 threads = 512B, often split into 128B chunks).
Recommendation: This is the standard default for most dense FP16/BF16 GEMM
operations.

CU_TENSOR_MAP_L2_PROMOTION_L2_256B
Fetches two full cache lines (256 bytes) in a single logical transaction.
The H100 memory controller is robust enough to handle multi-line prefetching
Requires high data density. Your application must consume this data immediately
to justify the cache space.
Highest risk of cache pollution if the data isn't used.

A small but important note
Rule of Thumb:
Dense GEMM/Conv: Always use L2_128B or L2_256B. Maximize bus
efficiency.
Embedding Lookups / Sparse: Use NONE (32B). Don't fetch what you won't
touch.
Tuning Variable: The choice depends on Tensor_Inner_Dim_Bytes.
If Inner Dim < 64B, L2_128B might be wasteful. Match the promotion size to
your contiguous data width.

OOBfill
oobFill helps handle out-of-bounds conditions during tensor copy operations on
H100 GPUs.
Automatically fills out-of-bound regions with zeros or NaNs in the destination, not
in HBM.
Source data in HBM remains unchanged throughout the process.
Eliminates manual boundary checks in kernels, improving code clarity and
performance.
Useful for tiling operations, especially when tiles extend beyond tensor edges.
Choice of fill depends on application needs; zero for padding, NaN for debugging.

usage

The second statement uses Nan but during FMA operation its treated as zero



--- END OF 4. cuTensorMap.pdf ---


cp.async.bulk
Prateek Shukla

cp.async.bulk operations
cp.async.bulk is a family of PTX instructions for hardware-accelerated, asynchronous

bulk memory transfers on Hopper H100 GPUs.
These operations are offloaded to dedicated hardware and execute independently of
the SM's compute pipeline, allowing computation to proceed while data transfers
happen in the background
cp.async.bulk can handle large, multi-dimensional tensor transfers efficiently from 1D

to 5D tensors containing hundreds or thousands of bytes.
cp.async.bulk operations require barrier objects for coordination, ensuring proper

ordering between asynchronous transfers and compute operations

cp.async.bulk vs cp.async(ampere)
cp.async in ampere
Uses the Load/Store Unit (LSU)
It is "asynchronous" because the thread issues the instruction and moves on, but
the thread is still responsible for calculating the address and issuing the command
for every 16 bytes of data.
cp.async.bulk in hopper
Uses the Tensor Memory Accelerator (TMA)
A single thread issues one instruction to copy an entire tile and the TMA handles
all the address calculations, loop unrolling, and movement in the background

Some more key differences
cp.async (ampere)
To copy a 4KB tile of data, every thread in the warp has to loop and issue multiple
cp.async instructions. This burns register cycles and instruction cache.
Uses cp.async.commit_group and wait_group
cp.async.bulk (hopper)
One single thread can initiate the transfer for the whole block. The other 31
threads in the warp (or 127 in the block) effectively do nothing related to memory
copy initiation.
With mbarrier The TMA hardware updates the barrier's "transaction count"
automatically as bytes arrive

Layouts of cp.async.bulk
1.

The tensor layout

This is the layout used when you have a TMA descriptor (Tensor Map) and want to
copy a specific multidimensional tile.
cp.async.bulk.tensor.ndim.dst.src.barrier_type{.cache_hint}{.multicast}
dst_addr, tensor_map, coordinate_array, mbarrier_addr;

2.

The Raw Layout (Linear)

This is the layout used for simple, contiguous byte copies
cp.async.bulk.dst.src.barrier_type{.cache_hint}
dst_addr, src_addr, size, mbarrier_addr;

cp.async.tensor
Adding .tensor in the instruction specifies that the operation is tensor-aware,
meaning the instruction works on multidimensional tensor data rather than just flat
arrays
This opens up a bunch of other really important options which we can set in the
instruction. This is also what enables the use of cuTensorMap

cp.async.bulk.tensor.{1d,2d,3d,4d,5d}
1d/2d/3d tells the hardware how many numbers (indices) it needs to read from you
to locate the tile.
So basically once we get the n number of indices which are required to locate the
tile in the tensor then we can grab the tile as per the information given in
cuTensorMap
Nd in here means the tensor have N dimensions
We can have tensors with up to 5 dimensions

The state space of source and destination
In cp.async.bulk.tensor.{dim}.{space1}.{space2}
space represents the state space of the source tensor
space2 represents the state space of the destination tensor

These can be anything in ones which we discussed, global, shared::cta,
shared::cluster etc

The load mode {.tile, .im2col, .im2col::w ….:}
This modifier is critical because it tells the TMA hardware how to interpret the
coordinates you provide and how to transform the data on the fly
.tile - The TMA uses the coordinates provided in tensorCoords to calculate a

base address and follows the strides defined in the tensorMap to fetch a dense,
contiguous multi-dimensional box (a tile) of data

im2col
It performs a hardware-accelerated im2col transformation during the fetch. In past
you had to write a kernel to copy pixels from an Image layout (N,C,H,W) into a
Column layout (Matrix). This wasted memory bandwidth and register space
Now you can just give the coordinates of the top-left corner of a convolution
window and the TMA grab the pixels required for the filter, unroll them, and place
them in L2 as if they were a column of a matrix, this speeds up the operation.

The completion mechanism
cp.async.bulk.tensor.{}.{}.{}.completion_mechanism

We have two completion mechanisms
-

mbarrier::complete_tx::bytes
.bulk_group

mbarrier*:complete_tx*:bytes
The cp.async.bulk call takes the mbarrier handle (likely in [mbar] parameter) and
the completion mechanism specification. The hardware tracks this operation and
automatically updates the barrier's tx-count as data moves
When tx-count hits zero, the barrier phase flips and waiting threads are released
You need a pointer to the mbarrier and the size of the copy operation as the
operands for this operation

bulk_group
bulk_group is a much more simpler and lightweight alternative to mbarrier.

Instead of tracking the tx_count, you issue a bunch of copy operations using
bulk_group and then then batch them together using commit_group then wait on it
using wait_group until only N or less of the most recent bulk async-groups are
pending.

L2 cache hinting
cp.async.bulk.tensor.1d.shared*:cta.global.mbarrier*:complete_tx*:bytes.L2*:cache_hint

During our async copies if we let the data flood the L2 cache it will kick out other
important cached data which you might be using repeatedly. To prevent one use
data to take useful space from L2 cache we use L2 hinting
There are different ways to implement it for loads and stores
evict_first is a way to tell the hardware to throw the data immediately to save the
cache space
evict_last is a way to tell the hardware to mark the data persistent and keep it as
long as possible
evict_normal is the default behavior

L2 hinting loads(global -> shared/dsmem)
During the global -> shared transfers data is loaded and cached into L2 according
to write back cache policy.
For Reused Weights/Data (Best): Use evict_last. This marks the data as
"persistent," telling the L2 cache to keep it as long as possible.
For Streaming/One-Pass Data: Use evict_first. Because essentially you are using
the data once and then throwing it away

L2 hinting stores (shared -> global)
When writing results back to global memory, you typically don't need to read them
again immediately.
For Final Output (Best): Use evict_first. You are writing data to HBM and likely
won't read it back on this SM.
This minimizes cache pollution. The data hits L2 (to serve the write) but is
immediately marked as the first candidate for eviction, keeping the cache clean for
your inputs

Creating a cache policy descriptor
The createpolicy instruction in PTX creates a 64-bit cache policy descriptor that
encodes eviction priorities for specific memory access patterns. Here's how it
works:
A cache policy descriptor is 64 bit object which determines the cache policy
createpolicy.fractional.L2*:evict_last.b64 policy_reg, 1.0;
createpolicy.fractional.L2*:evict_first.b64 policy_reg, 1.0;

dest is the 64 bit register which will hold the cache policy descriptor
fraction(1.0) determines to what fraction of data policy is applied

Copying unstructured data vs structured (tensors) data
cp.async.bulk (Unstructured) is a hardware-accelerated memcpy. It treats memory
as a linear stream of bytes. It does not "know" that your data is a matrix, a 3D
volume, or a tiled tensor.
We use cp.async.bulk.shared/cp.async.bulk.global to copy unstructured
data
cp.async.bulk.tensor (Structured) is a smart, descriptor-based copy. It relies on a
CUtensorMap object (opaque handle) created on the host. The hardware
"understands" the dimensions, strides, and boundaries of your data.
We use cp.async.bulk.tensor to copy structured tensors, cuTensorMap comes
to play here

Unstructured copies

Operands:
dstmem - the destination address in the shared memory
srcMem - the source in shared memory
size - size of the data transferred in bytes
mbar - the pointer to the mbarrier object which you are using
cache_policy - 64 bit pointer to the policy descriptor

Operands:
Dst: the destination address in the global
Src: The source from where the copy is done
Size: size of transaction
Cache_policy: the descriptor for the cache policy
Mask: for masked writes, specifies which bytes to write for the destination

dst - the destination address in the dsmem
src - the source address in the shared memory
size - copy size
completion_mechanism - mbarriers
The point here is that you are not transferring data to the shared memory allocated
to some other block but you are moving data to a location in distributed shared
memory which is pooled by all the blocks

Origins of multicast
Computing data is quicker than moving data. Especially moving data from HBM is
really time and energy intensive. Computation can be done a lot more quicker
A lot of deep learning applications use gemms and in gemm many different blocks
need to read the same chunk of Matrix A to multiply it against their specific chunk of
Matrix B. If SM0, SM1, SM2, and SM3 all need "Tile A0".
In the previous generations if you had 4 SMs that all needed the same piece of data
(a weight matrix for a neural network layer), all 4 SMs had to individually request
that data from the global memory (which was really expensive).
Why not fetch the data once from HBM and copy it to all 4 SMs simultaneously as it
flows through the wire?

Breakdown of the operation
The TMA reads size bytes from Global Memory (srcMem) into the L2 cache. The cache hint
tells L2 to persist this line, optimizing bandwidth for subsequent accesses by other waves.
The L2 cache controller reads the data once and broadcasts it over the cluster crossbar,
simultaneously targeting the SMEM banks of every block defined in the multicast mask.
The L2 cache controller reads the data once and broadcasts it over the cluster crossbar,
simultaneously targeting the SMEM banks of every block defined in the multicast mask.
Upon completion, the TMA uses the mbar pointer (also multicast-encoded) to atomically add
size bytes to the transaction count of the mbarrier in every participating block simultaneously
single leader thread issues this non-blocking instruction. The TMA hardware manages the
entire fetch-broadcast-signal pipeline independently, allowing threads in all blocks to compute
or sleep while waiting

Mbarriers and multicast
Its really easy to shoot yourself in the foot here because there are things to
understand about using mbarriers for specific thread blocks in the clusters.
the mbarrier object is replicated at the same relative memory offset within the
Shared Memory of every participating CTA. When the producer issues the TMA
instruction, the hardware broadcasts data to all CTAs in the ctaMask and
automatically signals the mbarrier at that specific address in each destination CTA
The hardware knows the group members immediately from the instruction's mask.
Receiver CTAs do not need to 'arrive' to form the group; they simply wait on their
local mbarrier instance to know when valid data has landed

The first thread (or any single thread) of all the blocks in the cluster call expect_tx
with the amount of data they are expecting and they all are pointing to the mbarrier in
their own shared memory. The way cp.async tracks the barrier is by using offset to
get to the mbarrier for each block
A single thread in the whole block calls cp.async.bulk with multicast and the mask
for all the blocks in that clusters, it points to its own barrier
If you want the data to be transferred to blocks 0 and 3 and not in block 1 and 2 then
you must not call mbarrier from block 1 and 2 and put them in mask
All consumer warps in all the blocks spin on their local barrier mbarrier.try_wait
The arrival counts are managed by the TMA itself for the masked blocks. TMA
automatically signals "remote arrival" to the mbarrier at the specified offset

A small note
You need to manually manage the shared memory layout when using dynamic
shared memory
Instead of doing this - extern *_shared*_ char smem[]; and the adding mbarrier
Use this - uint64_t* bar_ptr = reinterpret_cast<uint64_t*>(smem);
int tma_alignment = 128;
int data_offset = (sizeof(uint64_t)+ tma_alignment - 1) & ~(tma_alignment - 1);

half* tile_ptr = reinterpret_cast<half*>(smem + data_offset);

All participating CTAs (say, 16 CTAs running on 16 different SMs within the same cluster) must first establish themselves as a multicast
group. Each CTA allocates the same mbarrier object in shared memory and calls mbarrier.init.shared.b64 with an arrival count, then executes
arrive() on that mbarrier. This arrival isn't just synchronization—it's hardware registration. The memory subsystem now knows these 16 CTAs
form a logical group that will receive identical data.
Every CTA in the multicast group creates an identical CUtensorMap descriptor. On the host, you call
make_tma_copy(SM90_TMA_LOAD_MULTICAST{}, gmem_tensor, smem_layout, cluster_size) which encodes the tensor geometry, data
type, swizzling pattern, and critically, the cluster dimensions. This descriptor is passed to the kernel (marked __grid_constant__) and tells
TMA what global memory region to fetch and where in each CTA's shared memory to place it. All 16 CTAs must use this exact same
descriptor—any deviation breaks the contract that they want the same data.
Each CTA (typically from a single elected thread per CTA) issues the TMA multicast instruction:
cp.async.bulk.tensor.shared.cluster.global.mbarrier.multicast. Notice the .cluster scope and .multicast qualifier—these signal hardware intent.
The instruction takes the shared memory destination address, the tensorMap pointer, tensor coordinates, the mbarrier pointer, and crucially, a
ctaMask parameter. The ctaMask is a 16-bit bitmask (for a cluster size of 16) where bit i indicates whether CTA i participates—for example,
0xFFFF means all 16 CTAs receive the data.
Here's where the magic happens at the L2 cache level. The L2 cache controller receives 16 seemingly independent requests for the same
tensor tile, all tagged with the same mbarrier group ID. The hardware recognizes this pattern and promotes one request as the leader. That
leader request triggers a single read from HBM (let's say 1MB of weight data). As data streams into the L2 cache, the cache controller doesn't
just send it to one SM—it multicasts (simultaneously forwards) the data to all 16 participating SMs' L1 caches and directly into their shared
memory regions. You pay 1MB of HBM bandwidth but deliver 16MB worth of data across the SMs.
The TMA hardware also automatically decrements the transaction byte count (tx-count) on each CTA's mbarrier as data arrives, tracking
completion progress.
After issuing the TMA multicast, each CTA executes wait_barrier(tma_load_mbar, phase) or the equivalent mbarrier.try_wait in PTX. This
blocks until the mbarrier's transaction count reaches zero—meaning all expected bytes have been delivered to that CTA's shared memory.
Once all CTAs pass this barrier, they're guaranteed their shared memory is populated with the data, and compute can begin

Dst - the destination address
Src - the global memory pointer
Size - the size of the operation
Mbar - the pointer to mbarrier
Ctamask - the 16 bit mask for multicasting
Cache–policy - the cache policy

Structured copies

Copy data from global to cta
Operands dstMem - pointer to shared memory location
tensorMap, tensorCoord - address to tensorMap, array of box coordinates
srcMem - pointer to the global memory address
cache-policy - pointer to the cache descriptor

Operands dstMem - pointer to dsmem
tensorMap, tensorCoord - address to tensorMap, 1d vector telling the coordinates
mbar - the pointer to mbarrier object
ctaMask - Mask for selecting the blocks in which we have to copy
cache-policy - pointer to the cache descriptor

TMA stores using bulk_group
tensorMap, tensorCoords - 64 bit pointer to the cuTensorMap, array of box
coordinates
srcMem - the memory location from which data is coming from
Cache-policy - pointer to the cache policy descriptor

cp.async.bulk.prefetch
We can prefetch the data to L2 cache for lower latency
We use cp.async.bulk.prefetch.tensor to do that

A few important points
cp.async.bulk.prefetch is a performance hint, if you launch cp.async.bulk.prefetch
and then immediately launch cp.async.bulk.tensor and the data isn’t cached then
the device will fetch the data from HBM anyways.
Even though you use the same tensorMap for both the main cp.async op and the
prefetch operation there is no effect of the L2 promotion or the swizzling to the
way to data is cached in L2

cp.reduce.async
It offloads the atomic accumulation of an entire data tile from the SM to the TMA

This is literally the work which TMA does with that instruction. Following are two
versions
cp.reduce.async.bulk.dst.src.completion_mechanism{.level::cache_hint}.redOp.typ
e [dstMem], [srcMem], size{, cache-policy}
cp.reduce.async.bulk.tensor.dim.dst.src.redOp{.load_mode}.completion_mechanis
m{.level::cache_hint} [tensorMap, tensorCoords], [srcMem] {,cache-policy}

The redOps and the data types allowed
.add

.f16

.min/.max

.bf16

.inc/.dec
.and

.b32
.u32
.s32

.or
.b64

.xor

.u64
.s64
.f32
.f64



--- END OF 5. cp.async.bulk.pdf ---


Introduction to WGMMA
Prateek Shukla

4 important innovations in mma in hopper
Apart from having faster tensor cores these are other important innovations:
1. The tensor core operations are now fully asynchronous. The math instruction
is now non blocking. This enables multiple in flight ops which means that
tensor cores would be active for more time
2. We have now transitioned from using single warps for tensor core operations
to using warpgroups which allow the use of much larger tiles
3. The ability to fetch the data directly from shared memory/registers for tiles
using asynchronous hardware. In ampere threads could not launch mma.sync
operation until the data arrived in the registers. In wgmma we can skip loading
registers and directly launch math operations
4. Specialized hardware support for fp8 and sparsity

The paradigm shift: warp vs warp group
In Hopper we have transitioned from having a decade long emphasis on warp as
the unit of execution, we changed that to warp group
When you call wgmma you are fusing 4 warps to make a single computational
entity which operates on tensor cores. This maximizes the utilization of tensor
cores and avoids the hassle of pipelining multiple mma.sync operations.
All the 4 warps launch the wgmma instruction together. The warp scheduler
checks if all the warps converge at that instruction in PC and then scheduler fuses
them and then dispatches the math command to the tensor cores
Once the command is sent to the tensor core the threads go on to work on next
instruction.

WGMMA pipeline
Load the data from tiles asynchronously, pre-load the next buffer if nessecery
If loading A tiles into registers then use ldmatrix and a bunch of complicated
addressing, use the wgmma descriptor for loading b tiles
If not just create a descriptor for A and B tiles.
Launch the wgmma operation.
Collect the results from registers. Launch wgmma.fence.sync.align to make the
writes to registers visible do some complicated address calculations to move the
data to shared memory.

wgmma.fence.sync.aligned
wgmma.fence is a register-ordering barrier for wgmma.mma_async, not a
completion barrier. Its job is to make prior warpgroup register accesses visible in
the right order before a later wgmma.mma_async uses those same registers.
You need it in two main cases: before the first wgmma.mma_async in a warpgroup,
and any time a thread has accessed registers that a later wgmma.mma_async will
reuse as accumulators or A-fragment inputs
What it does not do is order shared-memory writes for the matrix
descriptors/data consumed by wgmma.mma_async. For that, the PTX docs require
an async proxy fence such as fence.proxy.async to order prior shared-memory
writes against later wgmma.mma_async reads

wgmma.mma_async
The core async instruction which tells the tensor cores to do
A is read directly from shared memory/registers
B is read directly from shared memory
C, D reside in registers
The whole operation looks like this
wgmma.mma_async.sync.aligned.shape.dtype.bf16.bf16 d, a-desc, b-desc, scale-d,
imm-scale-a, imm-scale-b, imm-trans-a, imm-trans-b;

.sync and .aligned
.sync - this is the SM wide barrier. It mandates that all participating threads in the

warpgroup (typically 128 threads, or 4 warps) must reach this instruction before
any of them can proceed.
.aligned - This qualifier asserts that all threads in the warpgroup are converged

(executing in lockstep) at the instruction's memory address (Program Counter)
and there is no thread divergence between the warp group

The instruction qualifiers
Shape - the shape of your tile, we represent them using m64, n{}, k{}
dtypeD, dtypeA, dtypeB - the datatypes of D, A, B tensors

m64nXkY
For all wgmma instructions, the M dimension is fixed at 64.
The K dimension (inner product dimension) is determined strictly by the precision
of the input matrices A and B.
The N dimension is the most flexible. It determines how many columns of matrix B
(and C) are processed.
N must be a multiple of the underlying memory allocation block size (typically
multiples of 8 or 16 depending on the type).
Valid N values range from 8 up to 256.

The fixed m
The hardware is designed to hold 4 registers per thread. This means that each
warpgroup can hold 128 * 4 = 512 registers
This means that if we use the smallest tile m = 64, n = 8 we get 64 * 8 = 512
elements which is exactly the capacity of a warpgroup
The hardware physically maps the data from A to tensor core input B. At M = 64,
The hardware has a perfect, static map. This requires zero decision logic at
runtime.
If we have m configurable then you need a massive Crossbar Switch (a complex
multiplexer) between the registers and the math units to dynamically reroute the
data based on your requested which is expensive

Operand location
Matrix A - registers/shared memory
Matrix B - shared memory
Matrix C/D - Registers only

scale_d
Just specifies if we should have the accumulate(D = A x B + C) or
overwrite(D = A x B) operation

Scale_d = 1 - accumulate
Scale_d = 0 - overwrite

scale_a/b
These are the scaling factors to scale the elements of A/B by 1 or -1

The register operand d
These are the registers in which the outputs are gonna be stored
In the PTX instruction string, operand d is the first operand. It must be declared as a
vector (tuple) of registers enclosed in braces {}.
Number of output operands can be calculated by Total elements in the output / total number of threads

The location of A
The tiles of A can either reside in shared memory or registers. And thus there are
two ways to tell wgmma where A tiles resides
a. Registers: If the tiles reside in the registers then we pass in the registers to
the wgmma instructions
b. Shared memory: We pass in the wgmma descriptor

A in registers
This is a good approach when you are reusing the data because loading A and B
from shared memory doubles the pressure on the banks, multiple writes into shared
memory would be costly therefore better to load from registers.
Moving data from shared memory is expensive. Moving data from registers is
cheap. Loading from registers keeps the reusable data where it can be accessed
faster.
The data for registers comes from shared memory, the instruction ldmatrix takes
the unswizzled addresses and loads the data into registers
If you are not reusing the data then loading A from registers does not make sense
because there is instruction overhead and register pressure

Mechanism for loading data from registers
Every thread provides the pointer for loading the data into registers and the
ldmatrix instruction populate the registers of the target threads with the data

Only for blackwell -

ldmatrix
It is the primary mechanism for populating registers with Matrix A data in the
WGMMA pipeline.
Unlike a standard ld.shared (which loads linear data), ldmatrix loads data in opaque
register patterns designed to align physically with the Tensor Core's input lanes
The threads which point to the data are sometimes not the threads which end up
with the data.
.m8n8 is the geometric shape of the matrix tile being loaded from Shared

Memory into the Warp's registers.
The qualifiers .x1, .x2, and .x4 dictate the vectorization width and the number of
matrix fragments loaded per instruction.

The x{1, 2, 4}
.x{1, 2, 4} tells us what number of core matrices of size 8 x 8 we can move to
registers for the computation
.x4 - This means loading 4 registers per thread or loading 4 core matrices of 8x8
dimension Most common because it saturates the register bandwidth by loading
16 * 16 * 4 = 1024 bytes of data from shared memory to registers
.x2 - Loading 512 bytes of data i.e loading 2 registers per thread. Generally use it
for loading smaller tiles
.x1 - 1 register per thread, mostly for boundary handling and other works.

How a 16x16 tile is loaded into registers from shared memory
Whole operation works in two phases:
The Address Phase: Who provides the pointer? (The "Gather")
The Register Phase: Who holds the result? (The "Destination")
With x4 we are working with 4 section of 8x8 tiles

The "Split-Warp" Strategy
We don't calculate addresses linearly. We split the warp into two "Vertical Strips"
(Left/Right) because ldmatrix loads 8-column chunks.
Left Half (Cols 0-7): This is controlled by the first 16 threads (Lanes 0-15).
Right Half (Cols 8-15): This is controlled by the next 16 threads (Lanes 16-31).

Phase 1: Address Responsibility (which thread points)
In this phase, the hardware looks at the address register in each thread to decide
where to read from Shared Memory. The warp is split into 4 groups of 8 threads.

* @param tile_row_offset Global row offset of this tile in the larger matrix
* @param tile_col_offset Global col offset of this tile in the larger matrix

Phase 2: Register Responsibility (who holds the data)
Once the data is fetched, ldmatrix distributes it across the warp so that it is ready
for Tensor Core math. The distribution pattern is Row-Striped across Groups of 4
Threads.
For ANY 8x8 matrix (M0, M1, M2, or M3), the rows are distributed as follows:
Row 0 goes to Threads 0-3
Row 1 goes to Threads 4-7
Row 2 goes to Threads 8-11
...
Row 7 goes to Threads 28-31

Layout of a single core matrix

The address calculation
The tile lives in shared memory in a swizzled layout (chosen to avoid bank
conflicts), so the bytes for a “logical row” are not stored contiguously in physical
address order.
Each thread starts from its logical coordinate (e.g., “I need row r, column block c”).
It then computes the physical shared-memory address for that fragment using
the swizzle mapping (often an XOR-based remap)
smem_addr = base + (row_offset ^ swizzle_mask) + col_offset
That computed address is the pointer the thread provides to ldmatrix.
Because the pointers are swizzle-mapped, the accesses land in different banks,
so the warp hits minimal/zero bank conflicts.
ldmatrix loads 16 bytes per thread and reorders it in fragmented layout

Address bits breakdown
To understand how swizzle formula works we need to understand the address layout
Bits [0-1]: Byte offset within a 4-byte word. Irrelevant for bank selection.
Bits [2-6]: The Bank Index. These 5 bits determine which of the 32 banks (0-31) the
data lands in.
Specifically, bits [4-6] control the upper 3 bits of the bank index.
Bits [7-9]: The Row Index. Since the pitch is 128 bytes (2^7), bit 7 is the first bit that
changes when you move to the next row.
We want the Bank (controlled by bits 4-6) to change based on the Row (controlled by
bits 7-9).

Swizzled address calculation
Physical_Address = (Base_Address + Linear_Offset) ^ Swizzle_Mask;

Where

./ 128 bytes = 2^7. We take bits [7,8,9], and shift them to positions [4,5,6].
uint32_t mask = ((linear_offset .> 7) & 0x7) .< 4;
./ Final Pointer
uint32_t smem_ptr = (base_ptr + linear_offset) ^ mask;

Packing
The NVIDIA GPU architecture does not have 16-bit registers; it uses 32-bit
registers. Therefore, bf16 data must always be packed in pairs when residing in
registers.
Container: One .b32 (32-bit) register holds two bf16 elements.
Layout:
Bits 0-15 (LO): Element N (Even index)
Bits 16-31 (HI): Element N+1 (Odd index)
When moving this data, you often use .b32 type instructions. When computing,
you use .bf16x2.

ldmatrix packing
If you use ldmatrix.sync.aligned.m8n8.x1.b16, each thread receives one
32-bit register.
This register contains two bf16 elements packed as described above.
If you use .x2 or .x4, you get 2 or 4 registers, each containing a packed bf16 pair.
The address in shared memory must be 16-byte (128-bit) aligned.
Using .trans allows you to load Row-Major data as Column-Major (or vice-versa)
directly into registers without manual shuffling.

.sync.aligned and .trans
.sync: It acts as a mini-barrier. The hardware needs to guarantee that T16 is ready
to have its register overwritten by data requested by T0. If T16 was busy doing
something else, the hardware writer would corrupt T16's state
.aligned: All threads must execute it together so the hardware knows the Warp is
ready.
.trans: this tells whether to transpose the matrix while loading the data.
Because the registers of a thread is not visible to others, this whole instruction is
carried out by hardware internally.

How they plug into wgmma instructions
When wgmma reads the registers {ra0, ra1, ra2, ra3} from a specific thread
(say, Thread 0 of Warp 0), it expects them to contain specific fragments of the
matrix.
Crucially, wgmma is hardwired to expect the EXACT layout that ldmatrix produces.
The Tensor Core hardware unwires these registers and re-maps them to the
physical dot-product units.
Instruction: wgmma... {acc}, {ra0...ra3}, desc_b …
Hardware grabs {ra0...ra3} from Warp 0. It knows this is Rows 0-15 and others
from the warpgroups and executes wgmma with data from B.

The wgmma descriptor
This is the 64 bit descriptor which contains information about the data stored,
strides and swizzle layouts
The descriptor packs 5 distinct fields. Consisting of the address, LBO, SBO, Matrix
base offset and the swizzle layout

The blueprint
A single 64-bit register encodes the base address, K stride, M/N stride, matrix base
offset and swizzle mode. This compact structure allows efficient memory access
patterns for tensor operations.
Every stride is pre-divided by 16 to fit into the 14-bit fields(last 4 bits are useless
because the shared memory pointer is 16 byte aligned). The hardware multiplies by
16 at runtime, ensuring 16-byte alignment and reducing address latency, crucial for
high-performance tensor-core operations.
The base address must be 16-byte aligned. This alignment ensures that the
preprocessed strides can be correctly interpreted by the hardware, maintaining
efficient memory access and avoiding performance penalties.

The base shared memory address
The base address is the first 14 bits of the descriptor. This is the shared memory
address of the tile which we are gonna load.
We extract the 14 bits from the address and then use them as the 14 bits of the
descriptor

Leading byte offset (LBO)
the byte distance in shared memory between two core-matrix columns that are
adjacent along the operand’s “leading” direction
LBO occupies bits 16-29. To encode the K stride, divide the desired byte stride by
16, mask to 14 bits, then shift left by 16
LBO for K major swizzled layouts is not used. Hardware assume its 1
For MN Major, LBO = offset from the first (swizzle-byte-size/16) rows to the next
(swizzle-byte-size/16) rows
For 128B swizzle, swizzle-byte-size/16 = 128/16 = 8, so it’s “jump by 8 rows” in that
normalized layout.

Stride Byte Offset (SBO)
It’s the other stride WGMMA uses (along with LBO) to navigate a matrix operand
in shared memory. SBO is the byte distance in SMEM to jump “one core-matrix
block” in the other (non-leading) direction.
SBO occupies bits 32-45. Encode the M/N stride similarly:
For K major swizzled layout, SBO is offset from the first 8 rows to the next 8 rows
For MN Major swizzled layout, SBO is offset from the first 8 columns to the next 8
columns

Matrix base offset
When SMEM is swizzled (e.g., 128B swizzle), the mapping from a logical address
to the physical SMEM bank/line uses a repeating permutation pattern. That pattern
repeats every 128B for a 128B swizzle pattern
If your matrix start address is exactly at the “pattern start” boundary for that
swizzle, then base_offset = 0. Otherwise, you must tell hardware which 128B
chunk within the repeating region you’re starting in. That’s what the base offset
encodes.

Swizzle mode bits
If the data is the shared memory is swizzled then we need to apply the swizzled
layouts to the tensors to read the data correctly
If we don’t set the correct swizzle layout correctly then wgmma units read the
scrambled data linearly
We have 4 swizzle modes, bits 61-63 control the swizzle mode. Use 00 for no
swizzle 01 for 128B, 10 for 64B, 11 for 32B

The whole descriptor function

What does the wgmma.mma_aync operation does
It asynchronously moves the data from your shared memory/registers to the tensor
cores for the operation. All the threads in the consumer warp group are calling
wgmma.mma_async
The tensor cores start computing on the data. Then result is going to be written
back into the registers of consumer warpgroup based on the warpId, laneId. Its low
overhead the hardware is dumping the data to the closes memory
The hardware wants to write results to the threads that are physically closest to the
math unit responsible for that chunk. So the threads are interleaved into small
blocks where each thread holds non contiguous data in memory

A thread is getting all those registers in output
If we are working with wgmma with m64n256k16 then each thread has 128
elements in its accumulators. Every single WGMMA instruction is launched by
every single thread in the warpgroup!
For 128 threads in warpgroup you need, 16 stmatrix instructions with .x4 if
accumulators are 16 bit and 32 stmatrix if 32 bit accumulators
In the case of kernels like flashattention 3 one should be careful about the
register pressure by the softmax gemm pipeline if using registers for loading the
A tiles.

imm-scale-{a,b} - option to “negate” A, this means A becomes -A
This can have two values 1 or -1, no other values because this transformation just
requires switching a bit instead of multiple bits
Imm-trans-{a,b} - this is option to transpose the tensor
This can take values 0 or 1
These are stored in bits because aren't enough bits left in the instruction string to
store a full 16-bit floating point number

bye



--- END OF 6. WGMMA-1.pdf ---


WGMMA Part 2
Prateek Shukla

Grouping wgmma operations
WGMMA launches are async. wgmma.mma_async puts work “in flight” and
returns immediately.
If we had to “track every MMA” individually, we’d either pay heavy scoreboard
overhead or be forced into overly conservative “wait for everything” barriers.
Groups give us a pipeline-friendly granularity.
wgmma.commit_group = “close the current batch” (make it trackable)
wgmma.wait_group N = “stall only when too many batches are in flight”

This enables overlap: while group g computes, you can prep/load for group g+1
(address math, TMA, staging, etc.).

wgmma.commit_group.sync.aligned;
This is just a way to bundle all the wgmma.mma_aync operation which are not yet
committed
The hardware can track multiple groups at once. By grouping them, you reduce
the overhead of tracking every single matrix multiply individually
You usually issue a set of WGMMA instructions that calculate one "tile" of your
output (e.g., a 64x64 chunk), and then commit that tile as one group.
We then wait on these operations

wgmma.wait_group.sync.aligned N
This is the synchronization point. It says: "Pause this thread until there are only N
committed groups still running."
wgmma.wait_group.sync.aligned 0 - Wait for EVERYTHING to finish. You use this

when you are about to read the final result in registers to write it to global
memory.
wgmma.wait_group.sync.aligned N - keep N groups running in the background

while you move on to prepare data for the next group

The “Commit/Wait” Timeline (what actually overlaps)
You don’t just “commit then wait”. You pipeline it.
Issue a bunch of wgmma.mma_async (this is one output tile)
wgmma.commit_group.sync.aligned;

Start preparing the NEXT tile (TMA, pointer math, etc.)
wgmma.wait_group.sync.aligned N; (keep N groups running)

Drain
wgmma.wait_group.sync.aligned 0;
Now it is safe to read accumulator D and store it out

wgmma.fence.sync.aligned
Warpgroup fence for the WGMMA pipeline. It serves two tightly related roles:
Arrive/group-boundary marker for WGMMA issue: WGMMA ops are issued in
groups. The fence is used to establish the start of a group’s issuance window.
Register ordering / hazard control for operands used by WGMMA
wgmma.mma_async is asynchronous and uses a warpgroup-level execution pipeline.

The fence is used to prevent reordering/hazards involving the accumulator registers
and any register-resident operand fragments (notably A when it’s register-sourced).
It is not the cross-proxy fence. If you are reading register modified TMA data, you
need a cross-proxy fence: fence.proxy.async (or an equivalent acquire/release
publication protocol).

The store
When the WGMMA instruction finishes, your result matrix C is sitting in
Accumulator Registers. The result is not stored as a contiguous matrix (e.g.,
Row 0, Row 1, Row 2...). Instead, it is fragmented across the registers of 128
threads in a highly opaque manner
In a normal store (st.shared), if Thread 1 writes data, Thread 1 provides the
address, we can’t use this because this would require manually managing
addresses.
In stmatrix, the data provider and the address provider are decoupled just
like ldmatrix.

The instruction stmatrix
Every single thread inputs the data which it got in its register from wgmma and
then it gives the destination pointer to write this data to

.m8n8: The atomic unit is still the 8x8 tile.
.x4: Writes 4 registers per thread (16x16 tile total).
.x1, .x2: Also supported for smaller tiles.
.shared: The destination is always Shared Memory.

stmatrix.sync.aligned - we are storing data for a matrix and all warps must

synchronize before proceeding and guaranteeing that the every single thread is
launching the instruction
.m8n8, .m16n8 tell us about the shape of the matrix stored. Note that .m16n8
shape is valid only for .b8 type in blackwell.
.x{n} tells us how many registers each thread holds. Greater N means larger tile
.b16: This denotes the data type and size of the elements being stored

stmatrix and fp32
The most critical thing to understand is that stmatrix does not support f32 data. It
only supports .b16 (packed 16-bit) and .b8 (packed 8-bit) types. This creates a
divergence in how you handle the output of wgmma.
When using FP32 Accumulator (.f32), Register State: The accumulator resides in
unpacked .f32 registers. You cannot feed these registers to stmatrix. You must
downcast and pack them first(yes this would give you lossy results)
If using FP16 Accumulator (.f16), the accumulator resides in packed .b32 registers
(treated as .f16x2). One 32-bit register holds two elements thus there is no
requirement for conversion and packing

stmatrix
Like ldmatrix, stmatrix is cooperative. Every single thread in the warp (0 to 31)
provides its own pointer. Each thread gives the shared memory address in which
its data belongs.
Because the threads in a warp hold data in a very specific, non-linear pattern the
addresses they generate must be equally non-linear to ensure the data lands in
shared memory as a contiguous, clean matrix
When you execute stmatrix, The instruction writes these elements into SMEM in
row major Order (contiguous rows) starting at [addr].

The m8n8 Tile Structure
The instruction operates on an 8x8 Tile of 16-bit elements.
Threads 0-31: The warp cooperates.
x1 Variant: Each thread holds part of one 8x8 matrix.
x4 Variant: Each thread holds data for four 8x8 matrices
Like ldmatrix, it assumes specific threads hold specific rows. Threads 0-7 hold
Row 0, etc.

Phase 1: The Address Responsibility (who points where?)
This works exactly like ldmatrix.
Threads 0–7: Point to Rows 0–7 (Left Half, Cols 0–7).
Threads 8–15: Point to Rows 8–15 (Left Half, Cols 8–15).
Threads 16–23: Point to Rows 0–7 (Right Half, Cols 0–7).
Threads 24–31: Point to Rows 8–15 (Right Half, Cols 8–15).

The Register Source (who holds what)
The "Striped" Layout Thread 0 acts as the "Column 0 & 1" owner for the entire tile.
It does not see continuous rows; it sees vertical slices.
Thread 0 Register Map:
Reg r0: Matrix A (Top-Left) → Row 0, Cols [0, 1]
Reg r1: Matrix B (Bot-Left) → Row 8, Cols [0, 1]
Reg r2: Matrix C (Top-Right) → Row 0, Cols [8, 9]
Reg r3: Matrix D (Bot-Right) → Row 8, Cols [8, 9]

The Serialization Loop
Since stmatrix.x4 consumes only 4 registers per thread per call. But the
accumulator for one output tile is bigger. So we do a loop over “slices” of the
accumulator:
Slice i → pack into {r0,r1,r2,r3}
stmatrix(...)
Slice i+1 → pack → stmatrix(...)
This is why the epilogue is usually a loop, not a single store.

The big question
The “atom” we are swizzling is 16B.
16B matters because a single row of an m8n8 bf16 tile is 8 elements = 16 bytes.
So each row is naturally a 16B chunk.
The trick is that We swizzle the row-atoms, not individual elements
Even when atoms are permuted, the data inside each 16B atom stays row-major
That’s why TMA can “unswizzle” back to a clean row-major matrix.

FP8
FP8 Tensor Cores deliver theoretically double the TFLOPs of BF16/FP16, reaching
~3958 TFLOPs on H100(Numbers shown with sparsity. Dense is ~½ these values).
This comes due to the lower precision
Halving the bit-width reduces global memory bandwidth pressure and allows
caching 2x larger models/batches in L2.
Most of the win is in matmul-heavy parts (linear layers, attention projections,
MLPs). Many pipelines still keep some ops in BF16/FP16 (softmax-ish, norms, weird
reductions).

The paradigm shift
Until roughly 2022, the standard for AI was FP32 or FP16/BF16. FP8 is primarily
an industrial advancement driven by Nvidia's H100 (Hopper) architecture which
allowed researchers to train models twice as fast using half the memory.
A lot of really big models like deepseek V3 used fp8 for training and kimi k2
famously used int4 Quantization-Aware Training.
Unlike INT8, FP8 is a "floating point", meaning it can represent a wide dynamic
range. Because 8 bits is very cramped, engineers split FP8 into two specialized
formats to balance Precision vs. Range: e4m3 and e5m2

Wgmma on lower precision
We have 2 lower precisions
- e4m3 -

4-bit exponent and 3-bit mantissa
Range: ≈ ±448 (max normal value 448, min normal 0.015625)
Primarily used for Weights and Activations (forward pass) because it has
good dynamic range and represents NaN/Inf.

- e5m2 -

5-bit exponent and 2-bit mantissa
Range: ≈ ±57344 (much larger than E4M3)
Primarily used for training gradients and back-propagation because it can
represent very large numbers needed during gradient updates.

Saturation
In FP32, your dynamic range is massive (~10^38). You effectively never hit the
ceiling
In FP8 E4M3, the "ceiling" is 448. If your matrix multiplication results in a value of
450, and you don't handle it, you hit saturation. When you cast a float down to FP8,
the hardware has to decide what to do with that 450. It usually has two modes
(controlled by intrinsics)
The value clamps to the maximum representable number (448). This distorts your
data (clipping), but keeps the math "stable."
The value becomes Infinity (or NaN in E4M3, which has no Inf representation). This
destroys your training run immediately

Scaling Factors
Since we can't change the physics of 8 bits, we have to cheat. We use Scaling
Factors. This is the core curriculum of FP8 on H100.
Tensor-wise Scaling: You calculate one single scaling factor (max value) for the
entire tensor matrix. This is simplest to implement with lowest overhead
Vector-wise Scaling: You assign a unique scaling factor to each row or column.
Block-wise Scaling (MXFP8 / Micro-scaling): The matrix is chopped into small tiles
(e.g., 16×16 or 32×32). Each tile gets its own scale.
Others like SmoothQuant, Delayed Scaling etc

Packing
FP8 does not exist as a standalone object during transport. The H100 memory
controller does not wake up for anything less than 32 bytes (a "sector"). If you ask
for 1 byte (one FP8 value), the GPU fetches 32 bytes, gives you the 1 you asked
for, and throws the other 31 away.
To fix the waste, we have the Packed Types e4m3x2/4 and e5m2x2/4. These are
distinct PTX data types that the hardware understands.
The x4 Pack (The Register Filler) Type: .e4m3x4 or .e5m2x4
The x2 Pack (The Math Input) Type: .e4m3x2 or .e5m2x2

The x4 Pack
These are packed datatypes which contain 4 fp8 values: e4m3x4 and e5m2x4
Total Size: 8 bits×4=32 bits.
Why it exists: It perfectly fills one standard GPU register.
The Layout (Little Endian):
[Element 3|Element 2|Element 1|Element 0]
<-- MSB (31)

LSB (0) -->

This is your primary format for storage and transport. When you are moving data
around or doing simple math (like finding max values), you want x4.

The x2 Pack
Packed datatypes which contain 2 fp8 elements: .e4m3x2 or .e5m2x2
Total Size: 8 bits×2=16 bits.
This matches the size of FP16 (half).
H100 is designed to transition people from FP16 to FP8.
The hardware has dedicated logic to take a 32-bit register holding two FP16s and
compress them directly into a 16-bit register holding two FP8s.
The Tensor Core often ingests data in these 16-bit chunks.

Fp8 conversion/quantization
If your source data is FP16/FP32, you’ll convert to FP8 via cvt (often vector forms like
.e4m3x2/.e5m2x2) and usually with .satfinite so out-of-range values clamp:
decide your quantization policy (rounding mode, satfinite or not, any
per-tensor/per-channel scaling) before feeding WGMMA.
PTX describes saturation behavior: if |input| exceeds the destination max normal, the
result becomes sign-preserved max normal.
PTX includes cvt.satfinite.{e4m3x2,e5m2x2}.{f32,f16x2} support for sm_90 or higher
`cvt.rn.satfinite.e4m3x2.f16x2` This instruction takes the 2 fp16 values, Saturates
them, Rounds them and the packs them

Hopper 4th generation tensor cores with fp8
Inputs are 8-bit (FP8), but accumulation happens in 32-bit (FP32) registers for
numerical stability.
Native support for both E4M3 and E5M2 inputs via WGMMA
One WGMMA instruction issues a massive chunk of math, hiding latency effectively
While the register is FP32, it acts like FP22((~8-bit exponent + ~13-bit mantissa) , a
known hardware trait.
We essentially treat FP8 as a compressed storage format while performing math in
a "pseudo-FP32" space.

The FP8 Instruction Syntax
m64nNk32: Fixed M=64, K=32 (for 8-bit). N is variable (e.g., 8, 16, ... 256).
.f32: The accumulator D type (Single Precision).
.e4m3.e4m3: Input types for Matrix A and B. FP8 is special in that A and B may be
different FP8 formats (e.g. .e4m3 × .e5m2). The PTX examples show mixed
.e4m3/.e5m2 pairings.
scale_*: these are the scaling factors, the sign flippers which can go from -1 to 1({-1,
1} for A and B and {0, 1} for scale_d).
K = 32 is the crucial difference, this means we consume 32 columns of A in one go

A on registers
For FP8 RS WGMMA, PTX shows the A operand as a vector expression of
registers passed directly to WGMMA.
The “obvious” way (load true 8-bit elements with ldmatrix ... .b8) is not an option
on SM90a PTX notes say .b8 with ldmatrix is supported on sm_100a / later, not
Hopper. You can’t use ldmatrix with fp8
That’s why most Hopper FP8 WGMMA implementations do either:
SS path: use descriptors for A and B or
RS path: load A into regs via plain shared loads (ld.shared.b32 / vectorized),
already arranged in the packing WGMMA wants, not via ldmatrix.

The Strict K-Major Rule
wgmma.mma_async does not expose transpose controls (imm-trans-a/b), unlike

FP16/BF16 variants
With no transpose, WGMMA interprets shared operands in the default K-major
canonical layout. If you feed MN-major tiles, the instruction can’t “reinterpret”
them so you must pack/transpose anyway
That transpose/pack step adds extra instructions, sync, and shared traffic, hurting
throughput
MN-major also complicates swizzle-atom alignment/divisibility constraints for FP8
(128b atom scaling)
Stage FP8 tiles in K-major (or prepack offline); only use MN-major if you’ll
transpose during staging

Precision Pitfalls
Even when the wgmma instruction is documented as using an FP32 accumulator,
empirical studies have reported that FP8 Tensor Core accumulation can behave like
a reduced-precision FP32 variant (~8-bit exponent + ~13-bit mantissa, i.e. “FP22
total bits”), meaning the lowest FP32 mantissa bits may be effectively lost during
accumulation.
For very large dot products (large K), this reduced effective mantissa can increase
rounding/truncation error, and the error can compound with the reduction depth.
Use K-slicing and/or multi-stage accumulation (accumulate partial sums, then
reduce partials in higher precision) to limit the accumulation depth per WGMMA
“chunk” and improve numerical stability.

FP8 wgmma instruction

Sparse WGMMA
This is a special type of WGMMA operation where tensor cores do the same MMA
math but the difference is that A is structured sparse (50% zeros).

descA (or register fragments for A, depending on RS vs SS form), descB(for B)
sp-meta (a .b32 register containing packed indices),
sp-sel ( a 32b constant, the “sparsity selector”, choosing which threads contribute

metadata for a group)
And other operands…

Some important points
The hardware strictly operates as Sparse A × Dense B. Even if Matrix B is
mathematically sparse (contains zeros), the Tensor Core treats it as a dense
matrix.
We need to create a register named sp_meta for every single thread. You only
make sp_meta meaningful in the lanes that HW will read, and in the other lanes
you typically set sp_meta = 0 (or anything) because those lanes are ignored for
metadata (for these shapes).

Packing and metadata
The physical rule of NVIDIA's sparse tensor core is 2:4 structured sparsity. We
provide a contiguous vector of 4 values called Quartet(I didn’t made this up). You
must delete exactly 2 of them and store the two survivors(yes this must happen in
global memory or with some transformation in shared memory)
This saves 50% of the bandwidth and storage. If you hand the GPU [8.5, 3.2], it
has no idea where they belong. Did 8.5 come from index 0, 1, or 2? This is where
Metadata enters.
Since we are selecting 2 indices out of 4 possible positions (0, 1, 2, 3), we need to
encode the positions of the survivors.

sp-sel
spSel tells the hardware who is responsible for providing metadata
In other words, which thread-pair inside each group of 4 consecutive threads
(T0–T3) is considered the metadata contributor for cases where only a pair
contributes.
TF32 sparse (.m64nNk16 .tf32): spSel must be 0 (threads T0,T1) or 1 (threads T2,T3).
FP16/BF16 sparse (.m64nNk32 .f16/.bf16): spSel must be 0 (T0,T1) or 1 (T2,T3).
FP8 / INT8 sparse (.m64nNk64 .e4m3/.e5m2/.s8/.u8):
all threads contribute metadata, so spSel must be 0 (anything else is undefined).

Configuring sp-sel (The Thread Selector)
Selecting 0 tells the hardware to read metadata registers from threads T0 and T1,
ignoring T2 and T3.
Selecting 1 tells the hardware to read metadata registers from threads T2 and T3,
ignoring T0 and T1.
Selection Rule 1 (Replicated): If your loader broadcasts metadata to all threads
(common), always choose sp-sel=0 for simplicity.
Selection Rule 2 (Sharded): If you split metadata to save registers, you must
dynamically match sp-sel to the thread holding the data.
Incorrect configuration causes the Tensor Core to read from empty registers,
treating the block as dense or zeroed out.

sp-meta
It tells where are the nonzeros in A
spMeta is a packed bitfield. The exact mapping is shown in the PTX figures, but
the rules are:
2:4 structured sparsity (FP16/BF16, FP8, INT8): A is sparse at 2 nonzeros per 4
adjacent elements in each row. Only the two nonzeros are stored, and their
positions (0..3) are encoded by two 2-bit indices in the metadata operand.
1:2 structured sparsity (TF32): A is sparse at 1 nonzero per 2 adjacent elements.
metadata uses a 4-bit index to indicate which of the 2 positions is present, and
only two specific bit-patterns are meaningfu; other values are undefined.

Configuring sp-meta for FP16/BF16/INT8
For standard precisions, a single register load packs enough metadata for exactly
four consecutive WGMMA math instructions.
Selection Rule: You must unroll your main loop 4 times and cycle sp-meta through
indices 0, 1, 2, 3.
Use sp-meta=0 for the first K-tile, sp-meta=1 for the second, and so on, until the
buffer is consumed.
This index increments the internal hardware pointer to the next set of 2-bit indices
within the loaded register.
Failing to increment this value forces the hardware to reuse the sparsity pattern of
the first tile for all calculations.

Configuring sp-meta for TF32 (The Exception)
TF32 metadata requires a unique selection strategy because the register only holds
enough information for two WGMMA instructions.
You strictly cannot use sequential indices (0, 1); you must toggle between the
hardcoded hardware bitmasks 14 and 4.
Step 1: For the first K=16 calculation, you must use sp-meta = 0b1110 (14) to decode
the lower bits.
Step 2: For the second K=16 calculation, you must use sp-meta = 0b0100 (4) to
decode the upper bits.
These specific values are required to align the hardware swizzler with the
non-standard 19-bit/32-bit TF32 data format.
Using standard indices like 0 or 1 for TF32 will result in a hardware misalignment and
incorrect matrix output.

Valid values of sp-sel and sp-meta

Different versions of sparse wgmma



--- END OF 7. Wgmma part 2.pdf ---


Stream-K
Prateek Shukla

The first principles
For one output tile C_tile, GEMM computes:
C_tile = sum over K-tiles of (A_tile_k * B_tile_k)
If one CTA computes all K-tiles for that output tile, no inter-CTA reduction is
needed.
If multiple CTAs each compute only a subset of K-tiles, each CTA produces a
partial sum and those partial sums must be merged.
In this scheduler, that merge step is called fixup.

The unit of work
each work unit includes:
- tile coordinates (m_idx, n_idx, l_idx)
- k_idx: start k-tile within the output tile
- k_tile_count: number of k-tiles this work unit computed for this output tile
reduction need is decided by:
- full tile in k: k_tile_count == k_tiles_per_output_tile -> no reduction needed
- partial tile in k: k_tile_count != k_tiles_per_output_tile -> reduction needed
that is the key predicate behind requires_fixup(...).

Split
A single CTA's assigned range of k-tile iterations may land in the middle of an output
tile. For example, with 3 output tiles of 90 k-tiles each and 4 CTA units:

A "split" is a CTA's contribution to a single output tile. Unit 1 above has two splits one
for the tail of tile 0 and one for the head of tile 1. The code processes these one at a
time (that's the k_tile_remaining loop in advance_to_next_work).

Tracking the triplet
For a single split (one CTA's work on one output tile):
K_idx: Where this split starts within the output tile's K dimension.
K_idx = tile_iter_start - output_tile_iter_start.

For Unit 0's work on tile 0, K_idx = 0. For Unit 1's work on tile 0, K_idx = 67.
k_tile_count: How many k-tiles this split processes. For Unit 0 on tile 0, that's 67.

For Unit 1 on tile 0, that's 23 (= 90 - 67).
is_final_split(): (K_idx + k_tile_count) == k_tiles_per_output_tile. True

when this split covers the end of the K dimension. Unit 1's split on tile 0 is a final split
(67 + 23 = 90).

The three roles follow directly
Given that an output tile might have 2-4 CTAs each computing a portion of K:
K_idx == 0 → you're the first split. You computed k-tiles [0, N). Nobody wrote to

workspace before you. Just store.
is_final_split() == true and not separate reduction → you're the final split and

epilogue owner. You computed k-tiles [X, 90). Wait for everyone before you, load
their accumulated result, add yours, run the epilogue.
Everything else → you're a middle split. You computed k-tiles [A, B) where 0 < A < B
< 90. You need to reduce your partials into what's already in workspace.

The lock: what it is physically
There's a contiguous array of ints in global memory, one per output tile (times
num_barriers for multi-warp-group kernels).
The pointer to this array sits right after the reduction data buffer in the same
allocation. Every lock starts at 0 when kernel launches.
The lock is a single integer that encodes how much K-dimension work has been
completed and written to workspace for a given output tile. In normal (non separate
reduction) mode, it counts cumulative k-tiles processed. It only ever increases.
The lock encodes progress in K-tile space. For deterministic mode, each split waits
for the exact cumulative K-tile count that matches its starting position, enforcing a
strict left-to-right reduction order. For non-deterministic mode, middle splits just
need to know the workspace has been initialized (lock >= 1), and they race to
atomically reduce into it.

Groups
Groups are an L2 cache locality optimization. They partition the stream-K units into
G independent sub-groups, where each group collaborates only on its own subset
of stream-K tiles. This is an optimization specific to stream-K as stream-K breaks
the nice wave-based rasterization pattern because a single CTA might span tiles
from different regions of the output grid, destroying that locality.
Without groups (G=1), all stream-K units share one big pool of K tiles across all
stream-K output tiles. Unit 0 might work on tile 0 and tile 1, while unit 7 works on tile
5 and tile 6 completely different spatial positions. Their data in L2 cache doesn't
overlap at all.
With groups, units 0 in each group will compute identical K extents of tiles that
would be assigned in the same wave according to the rasterization order of the
data-parallel formulation

Group hierarchy
Groups (up to 8, for L2 locality)
└── Each group contains multiple cluster-tiles
└── Each cluster contains multiple CTAs (thread blocks)
└── Each CTA processes K-tiles
The grouping is determined along the rasterization dimension. For example, if you
rasterize along M and have problem_blocks_m / cluster_m = 4, you'd get 4
groups. Groups are interleaved in the output space. Final output_tile_id is
computed as:
output_tile_id = (output_tile_id_in_group * num_groups) + group_idx

HyTiS
HyTiS solves wave quantization by making the partial wave use finer-grained tiles so
more SMs stay busy. It's a purely spatial decomposition (M×N) with heterogeneous
tile sizes, vs Stream-K's K-dimension decomposition with homogeneous tile sizes.
Instead of using stream-k, HyTiS uses two different tile sizes in one kernel launch:
- Large tiles (e.g., 128×256) for full waves → max throughput
- Small tiles (e.g., 64×64) for the partial wave → min latency
No reduction, no workspace, no barriers, no fixup
The tradeoff is that HyTiS can't help when the problem is small in M and N but large
in K



--- END OF 8.1 Stream-K.pdf ---


Kernel Launch
Prateek Shukla

Some important constraints and functions
__cluster_dims__(x,y,z) for compile-time thread-block cluster shape.
__launch_bounds__(maxThreads[,minBlocksPerSM[,maxBlocksPerCluster]]). The 3rd

argument is the cluster-specific one that matters more on SM90.
__maxnreg__(N) to cap registers per thread.
__grid_constant__ for read-only grid-lifetime kernel params. This is especially

common for CUtensorMap / TMA descriptors.
__forceinline__ Forces nvcc to inline the function within a single translation unit.
__restrict__ tells nvcc that, for the lifetime of that pointer in the current scope, the

pointed-to memory is not aliased by any other pointer used to access the same data

Need for multi kernel setups
The epilogue has a hard ceiling. Pushing past it destroys your performance. Fused
operations compete with the mainloop's accumulator tiles which might cause
register pressure.
Operations demanding cross-tile dependencies (LayerNorm, Softmax) are
architecturally incompatible with the independent-tile processing of a GEMM
epilogue. The math strictly requires a kernel boundary to reduce properly.
You must accept kernel boundaries and intermediate DRAM writes. The engineering
challenge isn't forcing a monolithic kernel it's making the handoff between kernels
virtually free
This is done by deploying dependent-launch protocols, L2 prefetch strategies, and
cross grid mbarriers

The Stream Serialization Problem
Generally one grid must fully retire before the next grid on the same stream can begin
issuing work. This strict completion ordering creates a utilization gap as the first grid enters
its low-occupancy tail.
The hardware scheduler treats same-stream grids as a single ordered queue. It does not
hand out thread-block slots for Kernel B until Kernel A reports global completion, even if
some SMs are already underutilized.
As Kernel A nears completion, only a shrinking subset of SMs still has active work. The
remaining SMs sit idle because no next-grid blocks are eligible under default stream rules.
The handoff is a full-grid retirement event, not a tile-by-tile transfer. That means all
dependency-safe overlap opportunities are ignored unless explicit dependent-launch
control is enabled.
The critical cost is tail latency amplification: silicon is present but not issuing useful
instructions during the final phase of Kernel A.

Hardware Signaling (GDC Instructions)
GDC instructions control over grid handoff timing inside the GPU execution timeline. Its
physical purpose is to separate “scheduler may start dependents” from “dependents may
read dependency-sensitive memory.”
griddepcontrol.launch_dependents is a scheduler-facing signal emitted by running

warps. It tells the dispatch logic that the dependent grid is now eligible to boot, even before
the active grid has globally retired.
griddepcontrol.wait is a hard execution fence in the dependent grid. Warps reaching this

instruction are held until the launch dependency condition is satisfied, preventing
premature reads of unresolved data.
Together they form a two-part protocol: early boot permission plus memory-safety gating.
The scheduler can overlap startup work while the fence preserves correctness for
dependency-sensitive loads. These are physical control points in the instruction stream, so
placement directly changes overlap timing and hardware contention.

Host Launch Authority
Only the CPU launch packet can authorize relaxed stream behavior for dependent
overlap. The physical purpose is to keep default stream semantics intact unless host
software explicitly opts in.
At launch time, the CPU writes attributes into the command descriptor consumed by the
GPU command processor. One attribute grants permission for dependent-grid scheduling
before full predecessor retirement.
If that permission bit is present, scheduler state machines honor launch_dependents and
wait as dependency control instructions. If it is absent, the scheduler enforces normal
serialization and the instructions have no enabling effect.
The handoff authority is therefore host-originated and hardware-enforced. Device-side
signaling cannot override stream policy unless launch metadata authorizes it.
This protects correctness across mixed workloads, where some streams need strict
ordering and others need controlled overlap.

The Dependent’s Wall (Wait)
This phase defines the early-boot stall point for producer warps in the dependent grid. Its physical
purpose is to let the dependent kernel reserve execution context early while blocking unsafe
memory traffic.
The dependent grid can be admitted and begin executing setup instructions on available SMs.
Producer warps run until they reach griddepcontrol.wait, where they are parked by hardware.
While parked, these warps cannot issue dependency-sensitive global reads such as activation
tensors produced by the active kernel. This prevents cache fill and memory ordering violations
from reading not-yet-final data.
Once the dependency signal is satisfied, the fence releases and those same warps resume issuing
loads. The result is immediate forward progress without paying full cold-start delay after producer
completion.
The tradeoff is reserved resources: parked warps still consume scheduling slots and can reduce
instantaneous headroom for other work.

The Producer’s Green Light (Launch)
This phase is where the active kernel emits the exact signal that opens dependent
scheduling. Its physical purpose is to trigger overlap at the last correctness-safe moment
that still exposes startup latency hiding.
Producer warps in the active grid execute griddepcontrol.launch_dependents when their
remaining writes are sufficiently advanced for dependent boot. This signal targets
scheduler eligibility, not immediate memory-read permission.
In persistent kernels, correct placement is tied to the final scheduled work tile’s lifecycle.
The signal should be aligned with true pipeline completion, not merely the lexical end of a
code region.
After the signal, dependent blocks can be dispatched while the active grid drains residual
work. The dependent grid’s wait fence still guards dependency-sensitive reads until the
required condition is met.
Signaling too late wastes overlap; signaling too early increases concurrent pressure and
can reduce net throughput.

The L2 Prefetch Trick (Split DMA)
This phase implements overlap by dividing roles across warps in the dependent kernel. Its physical
purpose is to keep memory fabric busy with dependency-free transfers while dependency-bound
producers remain fenced.
One producer warp reaches the dependency barrier and pauses before activation reads. A
different prefetch warp continues running and issues DMA-style requests for static weights that
are independent of producer completion.
Those requests are targeted to populate L2 ahead of compute demand, reducing later miss
penalties when the dependency fence opens. The memory system can therefore warm useful
cache lines during otherwise stalled dependency time.
The handoff is asymmetric but safe: activation traffic waits behind the fence, weight prefetch does
not. When the fence releases, producers see improved effective latency because part of the
working set is already resident.
This strategy only works if prefetched data has high reuse and survives in L2 until consumption.

Tuning the Overlap Window
The overlap ratio is set by the timing gap between dependent-launch signal emission
and true dependency readiness. A larger gap increases potential hiding, but only if
resources remain uncongested.
If signaling is too early, both kernels compete for SM issue slots, register file capacity,
shared memory allocation, and memory ports. This can throttle each kernel enough
that total time increases instead of decreases. If prefetch is too aggressive, L2 lines
churn before use and DRAM traffic spikes from refills. Bandwidth is then spent
moving evicted data back in, erasing the gain from prefetch overlap.
Practical tuning uses hardware counters: launch at the latest safe point, prefetch
only stable /reused tensors, and watch L2 hit rate plus memory-queue pressure as
the primary guardrails.



--- END OF 8.2 Kernel Launch.pdf ---


Kernel Design
Prateek Shukla

General format of CUDA kernels
There are 2 types of CUDA kernels
- Compute bound kernels (limited by the rate of arithmetic operations)
- Memory bound kernels (it's limited by the rate of data movement)
The crossover point is the arithmetic intensity(AI) = FLOPs / Bytes moved
Ridge point = Peak FLOPS / Peak BW
≈ ~295 FLOP/Byte(for FP16 tensor ops) ≈ ~20 FLOP/Byte(for FP32 CUDA cores)
- If your kernel's AI < ridge point → memory-bound
- If your kernel's AI > ridge point → compute-bound

Compute bound kernels
A compute-bound CUDA kernel is one where the limiting factor is math throughput
rather than moving data. These are the characteristics of a compute bound kernel
1. High Arithmetic Intensity: Lots of FLOPs per byte loaded/stored, Reuse is
strong: data is kept in registers / shared memory and used many times before
being evicted etc.
2. Producers are Idle: The most distinct characteristic is the Producer/Consumer
imbalance. The producer warpgroups are sitting idle at barriers, waiting for the
consumer warpgroups to catch up
3. Occupancy is “necessary but not sufficient”. Many compute-bound kernels can
run near peak with moderate occupancy if they launch enough WGMMA
instructions. Launching compute instructions is not issue, register utilization is.

Optimizing compute bound kernels
These are some of the optimizations methods for compute bound kernels
-

Warp Specialization
Persistent Kernels + Tile Scheduling
Circular buffer of shared memory stages with explicit synchronization
Cluster-Level Optimizations
Register Pressure Management
Megakernels
Epilogue Fusion

Warp Specialization
On Hopper, an SM can host many active warps, but only a small number can issue
each cycle
If threads inside a warp take different branches, the warp serializes those paths
(worst-case ~32×). But if warp 0 does loading of the data while warp 1 does
compute on that data, those are different warps with independent execution
contexts so you avoid the SIMT penalty.
With warp specialization we are intentionally giving different warps in the same
thread block different jobs, typically:
“producer” warps: move/prepare data
“consumer” warps: compute on that data

Why warp specialization helps
There are 3 reasons why warp specialization is almost mandatory for fast kernels 1. Resource constraints force it: You can’t fit the whole live state (regs/preds/etc.)
per-thread/warp without spilling, so you split the work across warps
2. Variable-latency ops are hard to schedule statically: Memory and other
variable-latency operations make it difficult for a compiler/static schedule to
keep all units busy.
3. Blocking synchronization would otherwise stall issue: If a warp must wait for
barriers etc, specializing lets other warps run immediately, so the SM doesn’t
waste issue slots.

Resource constraints
Resource constraints primarily register file capacity and latency hiding
requirements are the driving force behind Warp Specialization.
The primary bottleneck in wgmma kernels is the Register File. To maximize compute
throughput, threads must hold a large tile of the output matrix in registers.
However, allocating ~200+ registers per thread drastically reduces the number of
warps that can fit on an SM.
WS decouples the work into two roles, allowing asymmetric resource allocation
Producers: They issue cp.async instruction, requiring lowest number of registers
Consumers: These perform the WGMMA instructions, requiring maximum registers

setmaxnreg

The setmaxnreg instruction allows a warp to dynamically change the number of
registers it owns during execution.
You can launch a kernel with a low register count. This allows the GPU to fit many
active warps on the SM, maximizing memory bandwidth utilization.
Just before entering the heavy compute section, the consumer warp executes
setmaxnreg to request more registers, producers launch this to use less registers

Warp group count selection
For producers always allocate exactly 1 Warp Group. A single thread can issue a
cp.async instruction that moves gigabytes of data.
Producers do very little math; they just manage barriers (mbarrier). You can cap
them at ~32 registers using set_maxnreg.
For the Consumers, choose between 1, 2, or (rarely) 3 based on register pressure.
The number of consumer WGs is determined by the size of your accumulator Tile.
Budget: ~232-240 registers (leaving room for barriers etc). We use this in two ways
Pingpong/Basic: Each WG works independently on a full tile. EffectiveThreads = 128
Cooperative: Two WGs split the same tile. EffectiveThreads = 256

Pipelining
Pipelining is just overlap: you break work into stages and run different stages for
different “items” at the same time, instead of doing one item start→finish before
starting the next.
Without Pipelining (Sequential)

Load → Wait → Compute → Wait → Load → Wait → Compute → Wait ...
Each stage blocks until the previous one completes. Hardware sits idle during transfers.
With Pipelining (Overlapped)
Time ───────────────────────────────────────────────►
Load:
MMA:

L0

L1
M0

L2
M1

L3
M2

Compute on tile N while loading tile N+1 — hardware stays busy

M3

Why getting it right is Important
The Latency Gap: Global memory ~400-800 cycles. WGMMA ~30-60 cycles per
operation. Without pipelining, compute waits 20x longer than it runs.
Without pipelining, your kernel looks like this: load a tile (400 cycles of compute
sitting idle), compute on it (20 cycles of memory sitting idle), load next tile (400
more idle cycles). You're utilizing your compute hardware roughly 5% of the time.
With pipelining, while compute is chewing through tile N, memory is already
fetching tile N+1. If the pipeline is deep enough, compute never stalls waiting for
data. You go from 5% to near-100% compute utilization. That's the entire game.

Circular buﬀering
To overlap producers and consumers, you need a buffer between stages: a fixed
set of shared-memory “slots” (stages) the producer fills and the consumer drains.
Circular buffering = reuse those slots round-robin:
Producer writes stage i, then i+1, …, wraps back to 0.
Consumer reads stage i, then i+1, …, wraps back to 0.
This keeps compute fed while hiding long memory latency (load ~400 cycles vs
compute ~20 cycles): the buffer is what allows to load tile N+1 while computing
tile N.

Stages and why we need them
Circular buffering with multiple stages is about keeping a pipeline busy, not waiting.
If you have stages like Load -> Compute -> Store, a single buffer forces serialization.
That wastes time because only one stage works at once.
Multiple buffers solve this by allowing multiple if flight chunks of data at once. While
stage 1 is filling buffer A, stage 2 can process buffer B, and stage 3 can drain buffer
C. The circular part means once a buffer finishes the full journey, it is reused for new
input, wrapping around in a ring. So you don’t need unbounded memory, just
enough buffers to keep all stages occupied.
The reason we need more than one buffer is ownership and overlap. A stage cannot
safely overwrite data that another stage is still reading. Separate buffers let each
stage own different data at the same time. In practice, each buffer moves through
states, and barriers transfer ownership from one stage to the next.

The Two-Barrier Handshake
Each stage in the circular buffer has two signals, so producer and consumer never
race:
1) FULL barrier: Consumer waits here before reading a stage. For TMA pipelines, it’s
a transaction barrier: producer calls mbarrier.arrive and the TMA engine signals
completion when those bytes land in shared memory. Thus Consumer knows the
stage is genuinely populated without polling.
2) EMPTY barrier: Producer waits here before overwriting a stage. Consumer signals
it after it’s done using that stage.
Producer waits EMPTY → declares expected TX on FULL → issues TMA → TMA
completes → FULL trips → Consumer reads/uses → Consumer arrives EMPTY →
stage reusable

ABA ambiguity in circular-buﬀer synchronization
A circular buffer reuses the same stage indices across multiple passes. If
synchronization is indexed only by stage_id ∈ [0..Stages-1], then a consumer that
observes “stage 0 is full” cannot determine whether that fullness corresponds to:
Pass 1, stage 0 (old data), or
Pass 2, stage 0 (new data after wrap-around all the 4 stages)
To disambiguate multiple uses of the same stage index, the pipeline tracks a phase
bit that flips whenever the circular index wraps from Stages 1 → 0. Each participant
(producer/consumer) tracks a state triple:
index: current stage slot in [0..Stages-1], phase: 1-bit epoch toggled on wrap
around, count: monotonically increasing iteration counter (used for bookkeeping)

Iteration of counter and phase with each k tile

Reuse of barrier

Producer Flow
Only one elected thread per warpgroup actually touches mbarrier and TMA. Each
iteration does three things:
Acquire the stage. Wait on the empty barrier, then call expect_tx on the full barrier
Issue the TMA copies. When the DMA engine finishes writing bytes to shared
memory, it automatically signals the full barrier. This is hardware-level producer
consumer signaling.
Advance. Increment the pipeline state. Phase flips on wrap.
At the end of all work, mbarrier.try_wait waits for consumers to release every
remaining stage before the warp exits. You can't exit while someone is still reading
your data.

Consumer Flow
The consumer maintains two pointers into the pipeline to the stage being
consumed right now and the stage that can be released back to the producer.
Because WGMMA is asynchronous, it doesn't complete immediately. You can't
release the buffer it's reading from until you're sure the read is done. You can only
know that reading from a buffer has provably completed (via warpgroup_wait)
Each iteration: wait for data (full barrier) → issue WGMMA (fence, arrive, gemm,
commit) → wait for the oldest WGMMA to finish (wgmma.wait_group<N>) →
release the oldest buffer (empty barrier) → advance both pointers.
The cross proxy fence before each WGMMA prevents the compiler from
reordering accumulator reads/writes across the WGMMA boundary.

Three Phases
Prologue (Fill). The consumer issues N WGMMAs without releasing any buffers.
This fills the pipeline so that by steady-state, there are always in-flight WGMMAs
overlapping with TMA loads. The first WGMMA initializes accumulators to zero.
Steady-State. The throughput-optimal loop: for each k-tile, wait data → issue
WGMMA → wait oldest → release oldest. TMA and WGMMA are fully
overlapped. The producer stays Stages steps ahead of the consumer's release
pointer.
Drain. After the last k-tile is consumed, call warpgroup_wait<0>() to flush ALL
outstanding WGMMAs, then release the remaining N buffers so the producer can
exit cleanly.

Two major types of pipelines
There are 2 main types of pipelines which we use for high performance kernels.
Ping pong pipeline, cooperative pipeline.
Both cooperative and ping-pong pipelines use warp specialization: split your
threads into producers (who load) and consumers (who compute), give them a
circular buffer in shared memory, and let them run simultaneously. The producer
stays ahead, filling buffer slots with future tiles, while the consumer works
through slots that are already filled.
The difference between the two architectures is what happens after the
consumer finishes multiplying during the epilogue. Ping pong overlaps the
wgmma operations with epilogue, cooperative does not.

Cooperative Pipeline — The Architecture
384 threads, split into 3 warp groups:
WG0 : Producer — issues TMA loads
WG1: Consumer — runs WGMMA, then does the epilogue
WG2: Consumer — WGMMA and epilogue on same output tile.
The circular buffer has a fixed number of stages. Each stage has two barriers: a full
barrier that consumer waits on, and an empty barrier that producer waits on.
The producer fills stages round-robin. The consumer reads them round-robin,
offset by the pipeline depth. Phase bits disambiguate which pass through the buffer
you're on, preventing stale reads.

Looping strategy
If your chosen output tile is 128x128, the warpgroups divide the geometric workload
of that single tile:
Consumer 0 computes the top half (e.g., M = 0 to 63).
Consumer 1 computes the bottom half (e.g., M = 64 to 127).
Because they are working on the exact same output tile simultaneously, they
consume the exact same A and B tiles from Shared Memory at the exact same time.
Because we use persistent scheduling each CTA loops to grab a sequence of tiles
Every warpgroup steps through the exact same sequence of tiles.
Producer, consumer0, consumer1 all loop through tile T0, T1, T2, T3 if that’s the way
tiles are assigned

Loop for producers

Loop for consumers

Cooperative — The Consumer Loop
The consumers maintain two pointers into the pipeline: a read pointer and a release
pointer, offset by N (typically 1). The lag exists because WGMMA is asynchronous —
you can't release a buffer until the WGMMA reading from it has actually finished.
We first wait on the read cursor, issue WGMMA for that stage, and advance the read
cursor. Only after the corresponding wgmma work is complete (wgmma.wait_group)
can we safely release the older stage and advance the release cursor. That lag
between read and release is exactly what protects correctness.
After the K-loop is done, we drain outstanding wgmma ops so accumulators are fully
valid in registers. Then epilogue begins: we run the post-processing on those
register accumulators (like scale/bias/activation), move the data to shared memory
for some operations, and finally write the completed result out to global memory.

Cooperative kernels do NOT reduce WGMMA results
This is the key insight. The "cooperation" between warpgroups is about sharing
smem tiles, not about merging accumulators. Each warpgroup independently
performs wgmma over all K tiles and accumulates into its own register-resident
accum. No cross-WG register communication ever happens that's physically
impossible anyway since warpgroup registers are private.
Each WG writes its own disjoint M-region, The epilogue uses the thread index
(which encodes the warpgroup) to TMA-store only the M-rows that this WG
computed, to the correct region of the global output matrix.
The benefit over pingpong is that a single larger tile can be mapped by two WGs
together, enabling larger effective MMA tiles (256×128 instead of 128×128) while still
fitting the register budget per WG.

Cooperative — The Gap
After the consumer finishes accumulating all k-tiles for an output tile, it has to do
the epilogue: scale the result, apply bias, run activation, store to global memory.
During that entire epilogue phase, the Tensor cores sit completely idle. Nobody is
using them.
C0: [ MMA Tile 0 ] [ Epilogue Tile 0 ] [ MMA Tile 1 ] [ Epilogue Tile 1 ]
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ WGMMA idle
For large epilogues or small k-dimensions, this idle time is a significant fraction of
total runtime. The pipeline perfectly overlaps loads with compute, but it can't
overlap compute with the epilogue because there's only one consumer doing
both jobs.

Ping-Pong — The Fix
Add a second consumer. While one consumer runs its epilogue, the other does
MMA on the next tile. They alternate, and the WGMMA units never go idle.
384 threads, split into 3 warp groups:
WG0: Producer, WG1: Consumer(C0), WG2: Consumer(C1)
The producer warp group deallocates its registers to give more register file space
to the two MMA warp groups.
C0: [MMA T0][Epi T0][MMA T2][Epi T2]
C1:

[MMA T1][Epi T1][MMA T3][Epi T3]

C1's MMA overlaps C0's epilogue. C0's MMA overlaps C1's epilogue. WGMMA is
always busy.

Ping pong loop
Hopper kernels usually use Persistent Scheduling. You launch a smaller grid (to fit
perfectly on the SMs), and each CTA loops to grab a sequence of tiles.
Let's assume this specific CTA has been assigned a sequence of tiles: T0, T1, T2,
T3, T4, T5. The contract dictates:
Producer must process all of them: step size = 1.
Consumer 0 must process the even ones: step size = 2, start = 0. Consumer 1
must process the odd ones: step size = 2, start = 1.
Inside the outer loop, you process one specific output tile. To do a GEMM for one
output tile, you iterate along the K dimension. If your K dimension is 4096, and
your tile block size is K_TILE=64, then K_TILE_COUNT = 64.

Loop structure of producers

Outer loop for consumers

Inner loop

Ping pong pipeline
Each consumer gets exactly k_tile_count stages — where k_tile_count is the runtime
value of K / TileK (how many K-tiles to reduce over for one output tile). We generally
set the stages to be a fixed number (like 1, 2, 3, 4) and k_tile_count can be much
larger (K=4096, TileK=64 → k_tile_count=64 )
So the actual smem layout with Stages=4 and k_tile_count=64 is a circular buffer
reused by both consumers:
Physical smem: [slot0][slot1][slot2][slot3] ← only 4 slots exist
C0 logical: pos 0,1,2,...,63 → maps to slots 0,1,2,3,0,1,2,3,... ()
C1 logical: pos 64,65,...,127 → maps to slots 0,1,2,3,0,1,2,3,... (different phase)

Ping pong pipeline
The producer begins filling the 3-stage buffer with K-tiles for Output Tile 0.
Consumer 0 immediately begins its MMA. Consumer 1 is hard-blocked by the
mbarrier and sits completely idle. After chewing through all K-tiles for Output Tile 0,
Consumer 0 calls arrive() on the order barrier
Consumer 0 unblocks its own Epilogue phase and starts writing Tile 0 to global
memory. Simultaneously, Consumer 1 is unblocked. It calculates its starting logical
index (which tells it exactly which phase of which barrier corresponds to the start
of Tile 1) and begins its MMA
Once Consumer 1 finishes its MMA, it signals the barrier to unblock Consumer 0's
next MMA, while Consumer 1 moves to its Epilogue

Ping pong pipeline and barriers
In a pipeline with 3 stages, the hardware does not allocate a new barrier for every
single iteration. It allocates exactly 3 physical barriers in shared memory.
Consumer0 always waits on whichever generation of the barrier corresponds to
its output tile 0's data. Consumer1 waits on the generation that corresponds to
output tile 1's data.
Consumer0 and Consumer1 are always k_tile_count slots apart. They physically
reuse the same full_barrier_[i] across iterations, but with different phase bits.
Because Consumer 0 and Consumer 1 are working on entirely different output
tiles, they never fight for the same pipeline barrier at the same time.

Tile sizes
The output tile dictates how large of a chunk of the C matrix a single CTA computes
The Goal: Make tile_m and tile_n as large as possible. Why? Because every time
you load a tile of A and a tile of B, you perform 2×tile_m×tile_n×tile_k math
operations. A larger Output Tile gives you a higher Arithmetic Intensity (more math
per byte loaded from global memory).
Small/Medium Tiles (e.g., 128 x 128 or 64 x 128): A single Consumer WG (128
threads) has enough registers to hold the accumulators. We use Base or Ping-Pong
Massive Tiles (e.g., 256 x 128 or 128 x 256): A single Consumer WG physically runs
out of registers to hold a 256 x 128 output matrix in FP32. we generally use
Cooperative in this case

The Inner Tile (tile_K) and Pipeline Stages
tile_k is how "deep" you traverse the K dimension per inner loop iteration. We

size it to keep the Tensor Cores fed without blowing up your Shared Memory.
For epilogue overlap to be efficient, your K dimension must be large enough. If
the K-dimension is too small, Consumer 1 will finish its MMA before Consumer 0
finishes its Epilogue. If that happens, Consumer 1 will stall again, and you lose the
throughput benefits of the ping-pong design. The compute time must be greater
than or equal to the memory write time.
The Constraints:
WGMMA instructions natively consume K=16 (for FP16/BF16) or K=16 (for TF32)
natively.
You need multiple pipeline Stages (usually 3 or 4) to hide TMA load latency.

Tracking phase for ping pong warp specialized pipeline

Roles inside a warpgroup
Producer warp group (128 threads, 4 warps) — each warp has a distinct role:
- Mainloop DMA warp: TMA loads of A and B tiles into shared memory
- Epilogue DMA warp: TMA loads of C tiles into shared memory (for residual add)
- Scheduler warp: Fetches next tile coordinates
- Auxiliary warp: Optional extra loads
Consumer warp group 0 (128 threads) — math + epilogue for even tiles
Consumer warp group 1 (128 threads) — math + epilogue for odd tiles

Epilogue handoﬀ ping pong
The core objective of this handoff mechanism is secure, efficient sequencing
ensuring that heavy Math computation and Epilogue flushes occur seamlessly
between the alternating consumers without data corruption or pipeline stalls.
A dedicated Producer Warp strictly manages the epi_load_pipeline, issuing
non-blocking TMA loads to bring elements like Tensor C into Shared Memory for
operations like D= A X B+ C.
Meanwhile, Consumer 0 and Consumer 1 share the epilogue pipeline, creating a
shared-resource bottleneck that requires precise sequencing to avoid race
conditions in Shared Memory.
These Consumer warps are responsible for consuming MMA accumulators,
applying the epilogue math (e.g., ReLU or scaling), and commanding the TMA unit to
safely store Tensor D into global memory.

Barriers with epilogue
The most magical part of the ping pong design is that Consumer 0's Epilogue runs
at the exact same time as Consumer 1's MMA. To do this safely without corrupting
shared memory or issuing conflicting TMA stores we use 2x2 grid of mbarrier
objects in shared memory.
Rows (Stages): 0 = MMA Phase, 1 = Epilogue Phase (phase is not )
Columns (Groups): 0 = Consumer 0, 1 = Consumer 1
Each consumer has a group_id (0 or 1). When a consumer calls arrive(), it signals the
other consumer's barrier at the current depth stage. When it calls wait(), it waits on
its own barrier at the current depth stage.
The depth dimension cycles: MMA phase → Epilogue phase → MMA phase → ….

The 2x2
Each consumer does two ordered operations per tile iteration: first MMA, then epilogue.
We need to enforce:
1. Only one consumer does MMA at a time
2. Only one consumer does epilogue at a time
3. Each consumer does MMA before epilogue for the same tile
barrier_[depth][length]
Consumer 0

Consumer 1

depth 0:

bar[0][0]

bar[0][1]

← MMA handoffs

depth 1:

bar[1][0]

bar[1][1]

← Epilogue handoffs

Each consumer has a group_id. The protocol for each operation:

How does it work
You have two workers (Consumer 0 and 1) and two zones (MMA and Epilogue)
If both workers enter the same zone at the same time, shared memory corrupts. If
one worker waits for the other to finish completely, the Tensor Cores sit idle and
you waste cycle time. The 2x2 grid solves this by decoupling the phases.
Row 0 (MMA): Consumer 0 takes the lock, computes the math, and signals
Consumer 1. Consumer 1 is now cleared to start math.
Row 1 (Epilogue): Consumer 0 immediately steps down into the Epilogue row to
write its results to global memory.
Because there are two independent rows, Consumer 0's Epilogue runs at the exact
same time as Consumer 1's MMA. The hardware achieves perfect overlap. The
Tensor Cores never starve

The Full Timeline of One Warp Group's Iteration
1. ordered_barrier.wait()

← wait for Consumer1's prior epilogue

2. WGMMA mainloop

← K-loop: load from smem, accumulate into registers

3. ordered_barrier.arrive()

← "my MMA done, Consumer1 can start its MMA"

4. mma_tail()

← warpgroup_wait<0>, release last smem pipeline stages

5. ordered_barrier.wait()

← wait for Consumer1's epilogue to finish

6. epilogue.store()

← fuse + R→S copy + TMA store (details next slides)

7. epilogue.store_tail()

← wait for all TMA stores to land

8. advance pipeline states

← skip ahead by 2 (one for each warp group)

9. ordered_barrier.arrive()

← "my epilogue done, Consumer1 can start its epilogue"

10. fetch next tile, loop back to 1

The three independent pipelines

Notice the math warp group switches roles: during MMA it's a consumer of the
mainloop pipeline, but during epilogue it becomes the producer of the store
pipeline. The same threads drive both the computation and the store.

Each consumer warp group runs this loop per tile:

Inside epilogue store
The CTA tile (e.g., 128×128) is too large to move to smem all at once. It's broken
into epilogue subtiles (e.g., 64×64 or 128×32). The epilogue loops over these
subtiles:

Epilogue load producer
While all of this is happening, the epilogue DMA warp (one of the 4 producer warps)
has been independently loading C tiles into shared memory:

The load_order_barrier ensures the mainloop DMA warp loads the first A/B tile
before the epilogue warp starts loading C. After that, they run independently — the
epilogue DMA warp fills C buffers ahead of time, and the math warp group
consumes them via the epi_load_pipeline when it reaches the epilogue phase.
This means C data is likely already in smem by the time the math warp group needs
it, overlapping the C load with the WGMMA compute of A*B.

Cooperative epilogue handoﬀ
For each epilogue subtile, every thread in both consumer warpgroups executes:
Step 1: Load source matrix C (optional)
Step 2: Apply element-wise operations in registers
Step 3: Type conversion
Step 4: Register → Shared Memory (R2S copy)
Step 5: Shared Memory → Global Memory (TMA store)

Loading C and storing D
if the source matrix C and destination matrix D have the same element size, they
can share the same shared memory buffers. No need to allocate separate smem
regions for C loads and D stores. This is the protocol:
1. Producer loads C subtile into smem buffer at phase P
2. Consumers read C from that buffer (S2R copy)
3. Consumers write D into that same buffer (R2S copy)
4. TMA stores D from that buffer to global memory
5. Only after the TMA store commits do we release that buffer back to the
producer for loading the next C subtile

R2S copy
The output tile (CTA_M × CTA_N) is too large to move from registers to shared
memory all at once we don't have enough shared memory. So we break it into
epilogue subtiles.
The output tile gets divided into a grid of smaller tiles (EPI_TILE_M × EPI_TILE_N)
subtiles giving us a 2D grid: EPI_M subtiles in M × EPI_N subtiles in N
We then iterate over this grid in a nested loop:
for epi_n in 0_.EPI_N:
for epi_m in 0_.EPI_M:
process subtile (epi_m, epi_n)

Each iteration processes one subtile through the full registers→smem→gmem
path. Both consumer warpgroups participate in every iteration their threads are
partitioned across the subtile's elements, not across different subtiles.

Writing the data back
After the R2S copy, each thread has written its portion of the subtile to shared
memory. But the TMA store needs the entire subtile to be present and visible. So we
launch a cross proxy fence which makes sure that the thread’s writes are visible and
then we synchronize all threads across both consumer warpgroups using bar.sync
to ensure every thread has completed both its R2S copy AND its fence before any
thread proceeds.
Once all this is done the first thread of the first warp would issue the TMA store
operation into the global memory. We use commit_group instruction to synchronize
these operations. After issuing copy + commit_group, the thread doesn't wait for
the data to reach global memory. This means we can overlap the TMA store of
subtile N with the register computation of subtile N+1.

Integrating thread block clusters
Thread block clusters are a very important part of optimization in the pipelines, we
generally are not using the DSMEM feature of clusters for wgmma ops, most of the
cluster use is related to loading tiles for wgmma. Without clusters, adjacent thread
blocks that compute neighboring tiles of C would independently issue slow HBM
reads for the exact same tile of A.
We use TMA Multicast to issue exactly one read to GMEM for that shared A tile. The
TMA unit then uses the high-speed inter-SM network to broadcast that tile directly
into the local SMEM of every thread block in the cluster. This is the only use of
clusters in the pipeline.
Blocks within a cluster are guaranteed to run concurrently on the same GPC. They
can signal each other using cluster barriers residing in DSMEM.

Choosing the cluster size
Choosing the right cluster size is a crucial tuning step. Because clusters allow
thread blocks to communicate directly and share data, picking the right shape
can drastically improve performance by reducing global memory traffic
Shape of the Workload: Tall and Skinny (Large M, Small N): Use an M-heavy cluster
Short and Wide (Small M, Large N): Use an N-heavy cluster
Square / Large (Large M, Large N): Use balanced cluster size
Generally the 2 thread blocks inside a TPCs communicate a lot faster so its
advised to use a cluster size of (1, 2) or (2, 1) to utilize that feature.

Cluster size 2
If ClusterSize = 2, the grid is divided into pairs of tiles.
1x2 Cluster (M=1, N=2): Both blocks are computing outputs on the same row of C
but different columns. Therefore, they always share the A tile (A corresponds to the
M row) and use different B tiles (B corresponds to the N column).
2x1 Cluster (M=2, N=1): Both blocks are on the same column of C but different rows.
They always share the B tile and use different A tiles.
The persistent loop in your code changes. The step size is now based on how many
cluster tiles you process. But crucially, the CTAs within a cluster are physically
guaranteed by hardware to be co-scheduled and run concurrently.

RS vs SS
f16/bf16 (2 byte, equal width, no scales) -> SS always: These types have broad native SS
GMMA support (including non-K-major cases), so both operands can stay in shared
memory with no pre-transform step. This is the cheapest path (less register pressure)
Non 2 byte equal width (tf32/f32/fp8/int8) -> SS only for AkBk (TN), else RS: For these types,
wgmma effectively wants K-major feeding. If input layout is already AkBk, SS can feed
MMA directly. If not, you need operand swap and/or B transposition/repacking to make
compatible ordering; that flexibility is implemented in RS (register-sourced A +
transpose/swap machinery), so dispatch flips to RS.
Mixed widths -> RS: Mixed-width operands usually require conversion/dequantization
before MMA. SS has no pre MMA transform stage. RS gives that stage via smem->register
copy on A, where conversion can be done.
Scaled / tuple mixed input path -> RS: Scales/zero-points add extra per-element arithmetic
(e.g., scale * A, maybe + zero) before wgmma. That transformation is done in registers, so
RS is required

Decision Table

Scheduling
Scheduling is the decision logic for who does what, when, and in what order. It is
the specific policy + mechanism that maps Work Units (Tiles) onto Workers
(Threads/Warps/CTAs/SMs).
Good scheduling distinguishes between all hardware busy and some SMs idle. It
distinguishes between nice locality and thrashing and stalls. It ensures predictable
completion times rather than suffering from tail-latency cliffs.
Scheduler distributes tile coordinates to workers. Standard Coordinates: (M_idx,
N_idx, L_idx) for batched or grouped problems. Split-K Coordinates: Adds (K_idx,
k_tile_count) when using Stream-K or Split-K strategies.

Why Scheduling Matters
The scheduler directly impacts three major performance vectors:
Occupancy, Utilization: Keep SMs fed with enough independent tiles to hide latency
Load Balance: Avoid the "long tail" effect where a few CTAs get huge tiles while
others finish early and sit idle.
Locality & Bandwidth Efficiency: Maximize L2 cache reuse, minimize redundant
global memory loads, enable better multicast opportunities (clusters).
Decoupling tile size from scheduling granularity: with persistent scheduling we have
third axis of decomposition: the K dimension. In traditional tile-parallel system
partition M×N output space across SMs. Each SM owns full-K tiles. This leads to
different tradeoffs with waste.

Non persistent scheduling
In standard (non-persistent) kernels, you launch a grid of thread blocks where Grid
Size = Total Work / Block Size. The GPU hardware scheduler assigns blocks to SMs,
and when a block finishes, it retires, and the hardware schedules a new one.
There are three problems with this system. First, you have to launch the same kernel
multiple times which comes with kernel launch overhead… second, you get tail
effects where if you launch 133 blocks and GPU has 132 SMs then The hardware
launches 132 blocks immediately wait for them to finish then launches only 1 block
Hardware schedulers are typically linear. They assign blocks in order, Block 0 might
compute the top-left corner (0,0), and Block 1 might compute (0,1). By the time the
hardware gets to the next row (1,0), the data needed for requested row would be
evicted from the L2 cache because the grid spanned too wide across N.

Persistent Scheduling
In Persistent Scheduling, you launch a fixed number of thread blocks (usually
equal to the number of SMs). These blocks stay persistent on the GPU. Instead of
retiring after one tile, they enter a loop, calculate the index of the next tile of work,
and process it, continuing until all work is done.
There are three schedulers which we are gonna learn in this lesson. They are:
1. Static Persistent Scheduler
2. Grouped Persistent Scheduler
3. Stream-K Scheduler

Baseline — Data-Parallel Scheduling
Each persistent CTA processes tiles in round-robin order:
CTA 0 gets tile 0, tile num_SMs, tile 2*num_SMs, ...
CTA 1 gets tile 1, tile num_SMs+1, …
Total Work: 150 tiles, Hardware: 132 SMs
Total work = 1.136 tile-units per SM, Actual execution = 2 waves.
Utilization = 1.136/2 = 56.8%
The work is identical to a non-persistent kernel. The only gain is guaranteed
ordering. Wave quantization remains.

Wave Quantization Elimination
With 132 SMs (H100) and 140 output tiles:
Non-persistent: ceil(140/132) = 2 waves, Wave 1: 132 SMs busy, Wave 2: 8 SMs
busy, 124 idle → ~47% of last-wave capacity wasted
The remaining 8 tiles are divided evenly across all 132 SMs. Each SM computes
approx 0.06 tiles worth of K-work for the tail and cross-SM reduction overhead is
strictly limited to the final 8 tiles.
The fundamental insight is that wave quantization is not a hardware limitation it is
a consequence of choosing tile-parallel decomposition. Persistent scheduling lets
you choose a different decomposition.

Static Persistent Scheduler
This is the default, high-throughput scheduler for standard GEMM problems. It is
"Static" because the mapping of work to threads is pre-calculated
mathematically, not dynamically claimed via atomic counters.
It treats the output matrix as a grid of tiles. It assigns tiles to persistent thread
blocks using a Rasterization (Swizzling) curve (often a Z-curve or U-curve). A
persistent block calculates its first tile index, computes it, and then jumps ahead
by the total number of launched blocks (Grid Stride Loop) to find the next tile.
We use this method for Standard GEMMs, Compute Bound kernels because it has
the lowest overhead (pure math, no synchronization between blocks) and
maximizes cache hits (swizzling).

Rasterization
After persistent scheduling, each persistent CTA maintains a linear work index.
CTA 0 starts with tile 0, CTA 1 with tile 1, and so on. After finishing a tile, each CTA
strides forward by the total number of persistent CTAs to grab its next assignment
This works. It's correct. And it absolutely destroys your performance.
Rasterization is the order in which CTAs are assigned to output tiles in the kernels.
This order directly impacts L2 cache locality by making sure neighboring CTAs
that share input data (rows of A or columns of B) execute close together in time.
Get it wrong and you're reloading entire matrices from DRAM every time you step
to a new tile

Why Traversal Order Matters: The L2 Cache Problem
To compute one output tile C[m, n], you need to load a strip of tiles from row m of
matrix A, and a strip of tiles from column n of matrix B. You stream through the K
dimension, accumulating partial results.
When tiles of A or B get loaded from HBM, they land in L2 and can be reused by
subsequent tile computations BUT only if those subsequent computations
actually need the same data
If you’re scanning left to right across a very wide matrix. You hold row m of A and
iterate through columns 0, 1, 2, ..., tiles_n-1 of B. If tiles_n is large, by the time you
finish the row and start row m+1 (where you'd reuse B's columns starting from 0),
those early columns of B have been evicted from L2. Now you have to reload
them from HBM all over again.

Path Strategy — AlongN vs AlongM
Rasterization uses two tile traversal strategies depending on the major (outer/slow)
vs minor (inner/fast) axis:
Column-major: outer = N, inner = M. Finish a tile column top to bottom, then move
right. You're sweeping down M for a fixed column n, every tile computation needs
column n of B. That column stays hot in L2. You're cycling through different rows of
A (which is the price you pay), but B gets maximum reuse
Row-major: outer = M, inner = N. Sweep across a tile row left-to-right, then move
down. You're holding row m of A hot in L2 while cycling through columns of B. A
gets maximum reuse.
Bottom line is whichever matrix you want to keep resident in cache, traverse
perpendicular to its reuse dimension.

Swizzling
Even though we're reusing A perfectly (one row, held constant), we're streaming
through B with zero reuse each column of B is loaded once, used once, and evicted.
When we get to the next row of M and start scanning again, we need those same B
columns... but they're gone from L2. We're back to reloading B from HBM. We need
locality in BOTH dimensions simultaneously so that the required tiles of both A and
B fit in L2 and get reused multiple times.
We use swizzling which modifies the rasterization path so that instead of
processing tiles in a thin line, the scheduler processes a "thick block" of tiles.
We tune swizzle size for thickness, if the swizzle size is 1, and you get standard thin
raster. If size = 2, the swizzle size is 4, and the traversal becomes 4 tiles thick.

A few important points
You want the minor (fast/inner) axis to be the longer dimension Because a longer
inner loop means more iterations before you take a "major step" and the major step
is where the expensive cache context switch happens.
When you step in the major dimension, you're potentially shifting to a completely
new strip of the other input matrix, which means new data needs to load into L2 and
old data gets evicted.
The swizzle size is tunable. Larger swizzle = more locality = better L2 reuse, but at
diminishing returns. The sweet spot depends on L2 cache size, tile size, and matrix
dimensions. CUTLASS typically uses values like 1, 2, 4, or 8.

Clusters and swizzling
In plain swizzle, reuse is hoping that neighboring CTAs run close in time. Even with a
perfect logical order, persistent CTAs finish at different times (edge predication,
uneven math paths, split-K/reduction overhead). So physical execution order drifts
away from logical order, and neighboring tiles may no longer be close in time. Good
schedulers try to keep CTAs in the same locality region despite this drift.
Clusters solve this issue as CTAs inside a cluster execute together in space and
time. They can synchronize and cooperate on data movement. Shared operand
panels can be reused across CTAs in the cluster making reuse intentional, not
accidental.
We get better L2 utilization as intra-cluster mapping defines local sharing pattern
where inter-cluster rasterization defines global reuse flow. This minimizes reuse
distance at both local and global levels.

Grouped Persistent Scheduling
This scheduler is designed for kernels like Grouped GEMM, where you want to
compute multiple distinct GEMMs in a single kernel launch.
Instead of thinking of the workload as "Group 0, then Group 1...", the scheduler
conceptually concatenates all tiles from all groups into one long linear sequence.
The scheduler maintains current group ID of the problem (0, 1, 2...), the global linear
index where this group begins, total_tiles: number of tiles in this specific group.
Groups have different sizes. So when a CTA’s linear_idx moves forward
(Progression is typically grid-stride: linear_idx += grid_size per tile), it may cross
group boundaries. A naive scalar search is expensive. We use warp-level speculative
search

warp-level speculative search
If linear_idx isn’t in the current group, the warp scans groups in batches of 32. Each
lane loads one group’s shape and computes its (cluster-aligned) tile count. Using
warp intrinsics (__ballot_sync, __ffs, __shfl_sync), it picks the lane whose range
contains linear_idx and broadcasts that GroupInfo. If no hit, it jumps ahead by 32
groups and repeats.
After finding the owning group, compute the local offset k = linear_idx start_linear_idx, swizzle k → (cluster_major, cluster_minor), convert to (M,N) per
raster order (AlongM/AlongN), and add CTA-in-cluster offsets.
The scan is usually cheap because persistence amortizes it mostly triggered only at
group boundaries.

Slow path
Warp lanes speculate on different groups. lane 0 checks group G, lane 1 checks G+1, …
lane 31 checks G+31
Each lane computes its candidate group’s tile count (total_tiles), including padding for
cluster/swizzle alignment.
Warp inclusive prefix sum computes cumulative tiles across those 32 candidates
shfl_sync loop
Each lane derives its own candidate start offset (start_linear_idx) and checks if
linear_idx < start + total_tiles using ballot sync
If one or more lanes match then you pick first matching lane (__ffs) and broadcast
winner’s group_idx/start/total_tiles to whole warp (__shfl_sync)
If none match you advance by 32 groups and repeat. Start offset is updated from lane 31
cumulative sum

The Problem with Data-Parallel Scheduling
The "Tail Effect": Standard schedulers assign full output tiles to Thread Blocks. If
the total number of tiles isn't a perfect multiple of the available SMs, the final
"wave" of work is only partially filled. During this tail wave, active SMs process
their final tiles while the remaining SMs sit completely idle, waiting for the kernel
to finish.
This inefficiency is a software decomposition problem, not a hardware limitation
Instead of viewing the problem as a 2D grid of output tiles, we introduce
Stream-K scheduling which treats the entire matrix multiplication as a single,
continuous 1D tape of math iterations

Stream-K Scheduling
Standard Scheduler schedules Output Tiles (M, N). The unit of work is "Computing
one full output tile. With Stream-K Scheduler, we schedules Math Iterations where
the unit of work is a specific number of MMA ops.
Stream K eliminates the idle time of 133rd tile by splitting the 133rd tile into 132 tiny
pieces, so everyone finishes at the exact moment. The scheduler calculates the
total math operations required for the entire problem and divides this work strictly
and evenly across all available processing units.
It divides this total work strictly evenly by the number of available processing units.
A Thread Block might compute a full tile, inherit a partially finished tile, or stop
halfway through a tile when its assigned budget runs out

Hybrid Implementation: Targeting the Tail
Splitting tiles across the K-dimension introduces cross-block communication
overhead. Applying Stream-K to the entire problem is often counterproductive.
The optimal implementation is a hybrid approach. The scheduler keeps the early
waves purely data-parallel for maximum throughput.
The 50% Heuristic: Stream-K splitting is only applied to the final "tail" waves to
balance the load. If the tail wave is already mostly full (e.g., >50%), the scheduler
falls back to standard data-parallel execution to avoid unnecessary reduction
overhead.

How does Stream K scheduling works
The scheduler calculates the total number of "math steps" in the remaining tiles.

It divides this total work strictly evenly by the number of available SMs/Clusters

Each Cluster is assigned a specific range of this 1D tape. This results in 3 types of
work. Most of the time, a Cluster’s assigned range covers complete (M,N) tiles.
A Cluster might inherit a tile that the previous Cluster started but didn't finish.
A Cluster might run out of its assigned budget halfway through a tile. It computes
the first half of the K-loop for this tile, saves the partial result, and stops.

The "Fixup": Peer-to-Peer Reduction
If Cluster A computes the first 50% of Tile X, and Cluster B computes the
remaining 50% of Tile X, they need to sum their results before writing to global
memory. This is called Fixup. There is a global memory buffer (scratchpad)
allocated for these split tiles.
First half finishes its math. It writes its partial accumulator values into the
Workspace and sets a flag (Barrier). Second half finishes its math. It checks the
Workspace. If Cluster B sees Cluster A is done, Cluster B loads A's partial results,
adds them to its own registers, and then writes the final sum to the destination
matrix.

Backward Tile Iteration
When two Thread Blocks share a tile, the block computing the "end" of the
K-dimension must wait for the block computing the "start" to finish its work
before writing the final output
To minimize this idle waiting time, Stream-K workers iterate through their
assigned output tiles in reverse K order
By working backward, the "ending" block computes its shared portion of the tile
later in its execution sequence. By the time it is ready to combine the results, the
"starting" block has already finished, drastically reducing barrier wait times.

Preserving L2 Cache Locality
Standard scheduling preserves L2 cache locality by clustering work geometrically.
Stream-K's 1D tape approach naturally breaks this spatial locality, potentially
causing cache thrashing.
To solve this, Stream-K workers are logically grouped together. The scheduler
assigns units within the same group to process overlapping K-ranges across
different output tiles. Because they are iterating through the exact same
K-dimension slices simultaneously, their input reads overlap perfectly in the L2
cache.

Memory bound kernels
There are 3 major types of memory bound kernels:
- Bandwidth-bound: DRAM/L2 throughput near peak.
- Latency-bound: long scoreboard/memory wait dominates, bandwidth not
saturated
- Locality-bound: poor L2 hit, cache/TLB thrash, indirection-heavy access.
Bias, activation, scaling, residual add, amax tracking all of these would be separate
memory-bound kernels in a naive implementation. Instead they get folded into the
GEMM epilogue in good kernels.
You never write a standalone bias+GELU kernel; you just compose kernels in the
epilogue. One global memory round-trip instead of three.

The Big 3
Bandwidth-bound kernels: This is the bottleneck when you are already pushing near
the maximum sustained bytes/second from HBM (or sometimes L2), so runtime is
dominated by how many total bytes you move and how efficiently you move them
Latency bound kernels: Performance is limited mainly by how long a dependency
takes to resolve (memory access, atomics, sync, long instruction chains), not by
peak FLOPs or peak memory bandwidth.
Locality-bound kernels: This happens when you’re moving plenty of bytes, but a big
chunk is wasted due to poor reuse: low L2 hit rate, random/indirect accesses,
cache/TLB thrash etc.

Epilogue
The epilogue is the final processing stage of a GEMM kernel. It occurs after the
wgmma operations are complete in the registers, but before data is written back to
Global Memory.
It transforms raw accumulation results into the final output format but we can also
use this to do other memory-bound operations. The goal is to hide latency while
performing necessary math (scaling, bias, activation) without spilling registers
The epilogue is logically structured as a nested loop that iterates over epilogue
tiles. These tiles are subdivisions of the larger CTA output tile. Since the matrix
accumulation results reside in registers after the GEMM mainloop, this outer shell
manages the flow of data out of registers, through shared memory, and finally to
global memory via TMA managing the granularity at which fusion operations are
applied

Epilogue operations
1. alpha * Acc (scaled accumulator only), alpha * Acc + beta * C (linear combination)
2. Bias add: per-row bias per-column bias
3. Activations on top of lincomb/bias: ReLU GELU SiLU
4. Residual-style add paths (source added in residual form)
5. TopK + Softmax fusion (column-wise softmax variants)
6. Aux tensor ops: aux load (extra input tensor) aux store (extra output tensor)
7. Reductions fused in epilogue: row reduction column reduction scalar reduction
8. Absmax/amax tracking (common for FP8 paths)
9. Scaled fusion: scale factors for A/B/C/D scaling per row/column alpha-beta scaling variants
10. Block-scale-factor generation variants (for block-scaled workflows)

Sequence of operations in epilogue
1. Load all needed inputs for the tile: Acc, optional C, bias, scales, optional AuxIn.
2. Build base expression first: Z = alpha * Acc + beta * C (or just alpha * Acc if no C).
3. Add affine terms next: row/col bias, residual/additional linear terms.
4. Apply nonlinearity on Z: ReLU, GELU, SiLU, etc.
5. Apply output scaling/quantization (and collect amax if needed).
6. Materialize outputs:
- main output D
- optional AuxOut (pre-activation or post-activation, whichever you need)
- optional row/col/scalar reductions
7. Final type convert + store.

Templates
1. Common forward fusion:
Z = alpha*Acc + beta*C-> Z+=bias -> Y = activation(Z) ->D=cast/scale(Y) (optional AuxOut)
2. Training-style with saved aux:
Z = alpha*Acc + beta*C + bias -> AuxOut=Z -> Y=activation(Z) -> D = Y(optional reductions)
3. Backward-style:
dY = alpha*Acc + beta*C -> dX = dActivation(dY, AuxIn) -> dBias = reduction(dX) -> D = dX
4. Softmax/TopK path (special case):
S = alpha*Acc + beta*C -> rowmax/rowsum/exp normalization -> optional TopK -> D (usually
separate from standard ReLU/GELU chain)

The Orchestrator: Store phase
This phase starts when tensor-core WGMMA math is complete and the kernel
transitions from compute to output processing. Physically, the epilogue owns the
data path between accumulator registers and final global-memory writes.
The hardware now pivots from matrix-multiply issue slots to epilogue instructions
that read accumulator registers, apply output transforms, and prepare store-ready
values. This is the first moment where output precision and layout policy are
enforced.
A warpgroup-level handoff occurs from “WGMMA producer” behavior to “epilogue
consumer” behavior, typically guarded by internal ordering and barriers so no lane
reads stale accumulator state. Once ordered, each lane can safely process its
register-owned elements.

Epilogue Fusion Lifecycle
The SM90 epilogue isn't a single function call. It's a six-stage pipeline designed
around one principle: separate what changes from what doesn't
begin() — One-time global initialization
begin_loop() — Per-tile setup
previsit() — Operand fetch
visit() — Arithmetic compute (the EVT traversal)
reduce(), postreduce(), tma_store() — Post-compute & store prep
end_loop(), end() — Finish & cleanup

begin() and previsit() - Staging Inputs
This phase stages non-accumulator operands (bias, scales, possibly residual data).
The physical goal is to move auxiliaries from global memory into on-chip storage,
then into registers right before use.
Auxiliary vectors are fetched via TMA-assisted movement into shared-memory
buffers. Shared memory acts as the rendezvous point for reuse.
Lanes then load only their needed scalars/vectors from shared memory into
registers. This keeps upcoming fused math register-resident and avoids redundant
global reads.
A synchronization step confirms auxiliary buffers are fully populated before any
lane consumes them. After this barrier, the epilogue can execute fused operations
with predictable data availability.

Arithmetic Compute: visit()
This is the core fused-compute phase where scaling, bias application, activation,
and clamping happen directly on accumulator values.
Each lane reads accumulator registers, combines them with staged auxiliary
registers, and produces transformed outputs element by element. The data path
remains entirely inside the register file and ALU/Tensor execution resources.
Once register results are finalized for the current subtile, lanes hand off to the store
prep path rather than writing intermediates to shared memory. This preserves
bandwidth for the actual commit path.
The main risk is register overuse; if fusion depth exceeds register budget,
local-memory spills can erase the benefit of fusion.

Typical SM90 fusion pattern:

fragmentation is made tractable by explicit fragment->logical-coordinate
mapping, then a staged reduction pipeline
(register -> shuffle -> smem -> gmem/atomic) depending on scope.

Post-Compute: reduce()
FP8 output introduces a unique requirement: you need the absolute maximum
(amax) of the computed values to set the scaling factor.
Each thread computes its local amax across its fragment, Threads contribute to a
shared memory reduction buffer, A single thread computes the final tile-wide
amax, that amax is written to a global scaling factor pointer
Intra-warp reductions use warp shuffles so lanes exchange register values directly
through the warp network without shared-memory traffic. This is the
lowest-latency path for warp-scope collectives.
When reduction scope exceeds one warp, partials are staged in shared memory
and combined by designated lanes or warps. The result is then broadcast back so
all producers can apply consistent scaling or metadata.

Store Preparation: postreduce()
Register to Shared Memory (R→S)
Threads write computed fragments into a shared memory buffer using stmatrix
instruction. This is more than a transfer it is a transformation:
Swizzling: Data is stored using a specific layout (like SmemLayoutD) to ensure the
TMA sees contiguous, aligned blocks, regardless of the logical matrix orientation.
Precision Casting: This is the final opportunity to convert high-precision float
accumulators into fp16 storage formats.
The Handoff Boundary
Shared memory acts as the definitive handoff point. Once the data is staged, the
CUDA cores are released from the pipeline, and the TMA hardware independently
manages the asynchronous movement to global memory.

TMA store
The consumer warps hand off to the TMA engine.
The sequence:
fence.proxy.async — cross proxy fence to make sure TMA can view the data.

producer_commit — Signals the StorePipeline that a stage is ready

One leader thread issues cp.async.bulk.tensor
TMA takes over: Smem → Global Memory, asynchronously
After this we cleanup per-tile state, Advance pipeline barriers for the next tile
iteration, If using persistent kernels, loop back to begin_loop() with the next tile
coordinates

Full pipeline
→ Load alpha, beta, resolve predicates. Once.

begin()

begin_loop() → Rebind to tile (m,n,l). Per tile.
previsit() → Fetch operands. Hide latency.
visit()

→ EVT math in registers. The hot path.

reduce()

→ FP8 amax reduction. Conditional.

postreduce() → Stage results: registers → smem.
tma_store() → Hardware moves smem → gmem. Async.
end_loop()
end()

→ Advance pipeline. Next tile.

→ Final flush and cleanup.

Code and illustrations



--- END OF 8. Kernel Design.pdf ---


Multi GPU
Prateek Shukla

Let’s train a 1T parameter model on 10T tokens with
H100
Empirical observation shows it takes roughly 6 operations (FLOPs) per parameter
for every token of training data (forward pass + backward pass + update).
Total FLOPs=6×(10^12)×(10^13)=6×10^25 FLOPs
Let’s say we can get 1000tflops per second

That’s around 1900 years!!
This is why we need multiple GPUs

Multiple GPUs
Instead of spending thousands of years waiting for operations to complete we can
just connect multiple GPUs together and get higher throughput and run bigger
models. This is powered by two technologies
NVLink Gen 4
Direct GPU-to-GPU interconnect bypassing the CPU.
900 GB/s Bidirectional Bandwidth.
7x Faster than PCIe Gen 5.
NVSwitch
Enables every GPU in a node to talk to every other GPU at full speed

H100 clusters vs older clusters
In traditional computing, GPUs are discrete units that communicate over slower
PCIe lanes. The H100 paradigm shifts this by creating a "mesh" where every GPU
can access the memory of every other GPU at extremely high speeds.
An 8-GPU cluster can behave as if it has a single pool of memory and compute
cores
This architecture allows systems to scale from 8 GPUs in a single server to
clusters of 256 GPUs (using the NVLink Switch System) that communicate at
native chip speeds.

H100 DGX system or a node
It features 8 NVIDIA H100 GPUs using the SXM5 form factor.
The board includes 4 third-generation NVSwitches
The GPUs and switches are connected via fourth-generation NVLink, providing a
massive 900 GB/s bandwidth per GPU
8 Network interface cards(NICs) NVIDIA ConnectX-7: specialized processor
designed to offload networking tasks from the main CPU.
4x OSFP (Octal Small Form-factor Pluggable) cages

The Nvidia H100 Superpod
An nvidia DGX h100 superpod have around 127-128 GPUs organized in 4
SUs(Scalable units) each having 32 DGX H100 nodes.
The number 32 allows for a perfectly balanced "Level 1" network using standard
switch port counts (typically 64 ports per switch).
The H100 SuperPod is designed around the fact that a single DGX H100 node
has 8 separate NVIDIA ConnectX-7 Network Interfaces (HCAs) for compute, one
for each GPU.

Nvlink
Each H100 GPU features 900 GB/s of bidirectional bandwidth. This is
approximately 7x faster than the standard PCIe Gen5 interface used to connect
the GPU to the CPU. Nvlink allows GPUs to use this to communicate between
their HBM and skip the CPU path.
H100 uses 18 individual NVLink "links" to achieve this speed. Unlike previous
generations, the 4th Gen NVLink is more density-optimized, using only two
high-speed differential pairs per link (down from four), allowing more links to be
packed into the same space.

Nvswitch 3
On a standard 8-GPU HGX board, four NVSwitch chips are used to connect all
eight H100 GPUs. 4 - 5 Nvlink ports are connected to a single switch
The switches create a fully non-blocking interconnect. This means every GPU can
talk to any other GPU at full 900 GB/s speed simultaneously, without waiting in line
for data lanes to clear
NVIDIA uses NVSwitch chips in external trays called NVLink Switch Systems.
These connect up to 256 H100 GPUs (32 server racks) into a single "SuperPOD”
The NVSwitch itself has ALUs which can perform additions/reductions in the switch
itself, this is one of the most important feature which results in massive performance
gains.

Connectx
Inside the server box, GPUs talk via NVLink (900 GB/s). Once data needs to leave
the box to reach another server, it hits ConnectX-7. There are also 8 Compute
Network Interfaces (ConnectX-7) in a DGX.
This is the bottleneck. Your training speed is determined by how efficiently you
manage this 18x drop in bandwidth. ConnectX-7 exists to minimize the penalty of
leaving the box.
ConnectX7 allows the network to read/write GPU memory without the CPU
knowing.
The NIC works with the network switches to sum gradients in flight. This turns the
network traffic from O(N) (linear growth with cluster size) to O(1) (constant traffic).
This is the only reason large-scale training scales linearly

The OSPF cages
These 4 physical cages provide 8 separate 400Gb/s network links (totaling 3.2
Tb/s of bandwidth) by using "Twin-port" technology. They connect internally to 8x
NVIDIA ConnectX-7 network cards.
This allows for GPU Direct RDMA, enabling GPUs to talk to GPUs in other DGX
nodes without burdening the system CPU.
The 4 OSFP cages are exclusively for the Compute Fabric. Storage traffic does
not touch those cables.

The storage fabric
This helps in loading massive datasets into the GPUs and saving checkpoints
This uses separate PCIe cards located in the standard PCIe slots on the back of
the chassis, not the OSFP cages.
This is usually a Fat Tree or standard leaf-spine network. unlike the "Rail" network,
any DGX node needs to be able to talk to any storage array.

The rail aligned system
In a standard network, a server might have one cable that carries traffic for all its
components. In a DGX SuperPOD, the network is physically split into 8 parallel,
isolated networks these are the "Rails."
Inside a Node, there are 8 GPUs (numbered 0 to 7). Rail 1 connects GPU 0 from
every single node in the cluster to the same set of switches. Rail 2 connects GPU 1
from every single node to a different set of switches. And so on
Traffic on Rail 1 never interferes with traffic on Rail 2 at the leaf switch level. This
creates 8 independent planes of connectivity across the entire cluster.
The rail system leverages NVIDIA's SHARP technology, which offloads data
operations to the network switches themselves.

The rail optimized fat tree
The SuperPOD uses a 3-tier hierarchy (Leaf, Spine, Core) to connect the SUs
together
Layer 1: The Leaf Layer (Connection to Nodes)
Layer 2: The Spine Layer (Connection between SUs)
Layer 3: The Core / Super-Spine Layer (Maximum Scale)
These layers are nothing but a bunch of Quantumn 2 infiniband switches
connected together

Quantum-2 QM9700 InfiniBand Switch
It provides ultra high bandwidth low latency GPU-GPU interconnect
It has 64 ports of 400Gb/s connectivity
When you look at the front of the switch, you will see 32 cages. These use the
OSFP (Octal Small Form-factor Pluggable) standard. Each OSFP cage actually
carries two separate 400Gb/s links. 32 Cages × 2 Links = 64 Logical Ports.
Since the QM9700 has 64 ports, it is the perfect size for a SU of 32 nodes.
32 Ports (Downlinks): Connect to the 32 Nodes in the SU (e.g., Rail 1 connects to
GPU 0 on all 32 nodes).
32 Ports (Uplinks): Connect "up" to the Spine Switches (Layer 2) to talk to other
SUs.

The leaf layer
This is where the cables physically leave the back of the DGX H100 server.
Rail Segregation: There are 8 separate "planes" of switches:
Rail 1 Switches: Connect only to the 1st network card (GPU 0) of every node.
Rail 8 Switches: Connect only to the 8th network card (GPU 7) of every node.
The leaf switches handle traffic within the local Scalable Unit. If GPU 0 on Node 1
needs to talk to GPU 0 on Node 2 (in the same SU), traffic goes Node -> Leaf
Switch -> Node. It never needs to go higher up the chain.
The QM9700 uses SHARPv3, which is 32x more capable than the previous
generation, allowing it to handle complex AI math.

Adaptive routing in the leaf layer
In the leaf layer, adaptive routing is critical for upstream traffic.
When a packet arrives at a leaf switch from a GPU and needs to travel to a different
SU, it must go up to a spine switch. In a non-blocking or even oversubscribed
fat-tree, there are multiple available spine switches it can use.
Instead of using a static hash (which always sends a specific flow to the same spine
switch, potentially causing collisions), the Quantum-2 switch hardware monitors the
queue depth and congestion levels of all uplink ports
The switch dynamically sends packets to the least congested spine switch link on a
per-packet or per-message basis. This ensures that even if one path to the spine is
clogged, traffic flows smoothly through others.

The spine layer
The Spine layer connects the Leaf switches together. This allows nodes in SU-1 to
talk to nodes in SU-2.
Spine Groups: The spine switches are also organized into groups that align with
the rails.
Spine Group 1: Connects only to the Leaf switches that handle Rail 1.
Isolation: This ensures that traffic from Rail 1 never accidentally "leaks" over to
Rail 2's cables, which would cause congestion (blocking).
If GPU 0 in SU-1 needs to talk to GPU 0 in SU-2, the traffic flows: Node (SU1) ->
Leaf (Rail 1) -> Spine (Group 1) -> Leaf (Rail 1) -> Node (SU2)

Adaptive routing in the spine layer
In the spine layer, adaptive routing manages traffic traversing the core of the
network.
Typically, in a standard 2-layer fat-tree, there is only one path "down" from a
specific spine switch to a specific destination leaf switch. However, adaptive
routing is still vital here for handling faults and multi-pathing if parallel links exist
If the buffers towards a specific leaf switch are full, the spine switches
communicate this backpressure. Adaptive routing features in Quantum-2 (like
SHIELD) help isolate this congestion so it doesn't spread to other unaffected traffic
flows in the spine.

The Core / Super-Spine Layer (Maximum Scale)
For massive clusters (e.g., 127 nodes or more), a third layer is added.
Function: This layer connects multiple "Pods" (clusters of SUs) together.
Optics: At this level, the system often switches to 800G optical transceivers to
reduce the number of cables required, while logically splitting them back into two
400G links.

SHIELD
In traditional InfiniBand networks, if a cable breaks or a link flaps, it takes around 5
- 30 seconds for the software controller to calculate a new routing table and then
push it to all the switches. This crashes entire training run
SHIELD moves this recovery logic directly into the switch hardware ASIC.
If a switch sees a link go down, it doesn't just drop packets. It immediately checks
for alternative valid paths in its local hardware table. If it finds one then it updates
its own table to avoid the bad node and goes to healthy neighbor, if it fails then it
sends a hardware signal to the neighbour so that no traffic is sent to it in future.

P2p mechanism for communication between GPUs
The P2P (Peer-to-Peer) CUDA mechanism is a feature that allows two GPUs to
communicate without using CPUs
We can do p2p memory copy explicitly or we can get p2p direct access and the
whole transfer uses Nvlink.
Unified Virtual addressing enables this whole system

Unified Virtual Addressing (UVA)
UVA allows the CPU and GPU to share a single virtual address space.
Before UVA: The CPU had its own memory pointers and the GPU had its own.
You had to manually manage which pointer pointed to which physical memory.
With UVA: The system determines specifically where the data is physically
located (in the system RAM or on the H100's HBM3 memory) based on the pointer
value alone.
You need to enable Peer access using cudaDeviceEnablePeerAccess otherwise
this feature can’t work

cudaDeviceEnablePeerAccess
Without this call the GPU might not use Nvlink and go through the PCIe

A few important points
cudaDeviceEnablePeerAccess(peerDevice, 0) is unidirectional. If you need to
copy back and forth or access memory kernels on both sides, you must call it on
both devices.
If you don’t enable this then you might fall back to a slower PCIe path
On H100 servers, this function will automatically utilize NVLink (900 GB/s) if
available; otherwise, it uses PCIe Gen5

cudaMemCpyPeer
enables the direct transfer of data between the memory of two separate GPUs
without involving the host (CPU) memory

You must enable cudaDeviceEnablePeerAccess to use Nvlink for copies

Truth about raw p2p
On an H100 HGX board, you don't just have 8 GPUs connected in a line. You
have a complex mesh connected via NVSwitches.
P2P: You have to manually manage which link you are traversing. If GPU 0 talks
to GPU 7, does it go direct? Does it hop through GPU 3?
The H100 has a bidirectional NVLink bandwidth of 900 GB/s. If you issue a
standard LD/ST (Load/Store) instruction across the NVLink fabric from an SM, you
are likely using a single distinct NVLink lane or a subset of them. You will struggle
to saturate that pipe. You are using a straw to drink from a firehose.
These are the reasons because of which we need libraries such as NCCL for
managing multi GPU connections



--- END OF 9. Multi GPU.pdf ---


